1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp  Author(s)
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Publication
Information
Author(s)
THE LAWYER’S GUIDE TO THE AMA GUIDES AND CALIFORNIA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION
HON.
ROBERT G. RASSP

Presiding Workers’ Compensation Administrative Law Judge
WCAB Los Angeles District Office
Adjunct Professor of Law, Pepperdine Caruso School of Law, Malibu, CA
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp  Questions
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Publication
Information
Questions
Technical Questions
Phone: (800) 223-5297
Fax: (800) 533-1645 or (518) 487-3191
E-mail: technical.support@lexisnexis.com
Visit Our Web Site: http://www.lexis.com
Editorial Questions
For questions about the Editorial Content appearing in these volumes or reprint permission, please call or email:
Robin Kobayashi, J.D.
Email: Robin.E.Kobayashi@lexisnexis.com
Phone: 415-908-3242
For assistance with replacement pages, shipments, billing or other customer service matters, please call:
Customer Services Department at ...................... (800) 833-9844
Outside the United States and Canada, please call ...................... (518) 487-3385
Fax Number...................... (800) 828-8341
LexisNexis® Support Center ...................... https://supportcenter.lexisnexis.com/app/home/
For information on other Matthew Bender publications, please call
Your account manager or ...................... (800) 223-1940
Outside the United States and Canada, please call...................... (518) 487-3385
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp  Cite As
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Publication
Information
Cite As
Cite as:
Rassp, The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers’ Compensation, Ch. no., § ___ (Matthew
Bender).
Example:
Rassp, The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers’ Compensation, Ch. 3, § 3.02 (Matthew
Bender).
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp  Copyright
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Publication
Information
Copyright
Copyright © 2023 Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of LexisNexis. All Rights Reserved.
No copyright is claimed by LexisNexis or Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., in the text of statutes, regulations, and
excerpts from court opinions quoted within this work. Permission to copy material may be licensed for a fee from the
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, Mass. 01923, telephone (978) 750-8400.
Library of Congress Card Number: 1930-4412
ISBN: 978-1-6633-6996-3 (print)
ISBN: 978-1-6633-6997-0 (eBook)
Originally published in 2007.
This publication is designed to provide authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold
with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional
services. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be
sought.
LexisNexis and the Knowledge Burst logo are registered trademarks of RELX Inc. Matthew Bender and the
Matthew Bender Flame Design are registered trademarks of Matthew Bender Properties Inc.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp Foreword
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Publication
Information
Foreword
This is the 19th Edition of Lawyer’s Guide and it is quite amazing how time has passed since 2006, the year of
publication of the first edition of this guidebook. This year, I came across a copy of the first edition of this guidebook
at my office in Lake Tahoe and it was about 100 pages long. The 2024 edition is approaching 500 pages. One of
the most rewarding aspects of writing a living document is to continue year to year adding information that is helpful
to attorneys, judges, and claims professionals.
We have hopefully recovered from the worse aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic and, as we enter the Fall of 2023,
there are some warning signs that another surge in infections may be looming, possibly from a new variant. One
thing we learned from the last three years is that it is highly recommended by infectious disease specialists at the
CDC and local health authorities that we all should still get vaccinated against the latest version(s) of the virus.
We have been seeing each other in person for trials, expedited hearings, lien trials, and SAU trials, and the
workers’ compensation community has gotten used to not working five days a week at a brick and mortar office,
appearing in person at conferences, or having pets stay away from computer keyboards. In fact, there is no truth to
the rumor that we are returning to in-person conferences at the WCAB. We have also gotten used to our hybrid
work schedules—most state employees can telework twice a week. Are we more productive when working from
home rather than when working at the office? Therein lies the question.
So as we move forward into 2024, this guidebook has been updated to bring you, our readers, up to date on issues
involving WPI ratings using the AMA Guides, permanent disability ratings, and apportionment of permanent
disability.
In late 2022, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) issued its revision to the DSM-5, which was published in
2013. The DSM-5 Text Revision is based on current medical research, clinical practices, international diagnostic
studies, and interviews with people with mental disorders, including family members of people with mental
disorders. The first step in determining whether or not there is a compensable psychiatric claim pursuant to
California Labor Code Section 3208.3(a) is there has to be a DSM diagnosis by a psychiatrist or psychologist. So
the debate rages in the psychiatric medical field—which version of the DSM applies in California workers’
compensation cases? This author strongly believes that the most recent edition of the DSM (DSM-5 TR) should
apply since it is based on the most recent research that has been developed over the last 10 years. More
importantly, the diagnostic criteria for many mental disorders we see in workers’ compensation cases has changed
dramatically over the last 10 years. For example, there is no longer a pain disorder listed in the DSM-5 TR. Instead,
the criteria for somatic related disorders, which include pain disorder, has been updated and clarified. The entire
chapter on anxiety disorders has been updated. Even the diagnostic criteria for adjustment disorder has been
clarified. We see many of our cases with those diagnoses.
Despite the changes in the diagnostic criteria for psyche cases, the determination of WPI ratings for them remain
the same—a strict WPI rating for a psyche case is still based on the DSM-IV TR Axis-V GAF score and page 1-16
of the 2005 PDRS GAF to WPI conversion chart. So Chapter 9 of this guidebook has been significantly updated
and you are urged to read it.
Also included in this update is case law that has developed since the Fitzpatrick case was published, involving how
and when an injured worker may be determined to be permanently and totally disabled with or without
Page 2 of 2
Foreword
apportionment of permanent disability and including the role of vocational experts. The Appeals Board issued its en
banc decision in Nunes v. State of CA Department of Motor Vehicles on June 22, 2023, which indicates that there is
no such thing as “vocational apportionment.” This case is still on appeal as of the publication deadline for this
guidebook (August 2023) and counsel is advised to pay close attention to the evolution of the Nunes case as it
returns to the Appeals Board on a new Petition for Reconsideration and a probable eventual journey to the
California Court of Appeal.
Additional updated case law has been added throughout the guidebook for the 2024 edition since the complexities
of workers’ compensation law has continued to evolve, especially in the medical-legal arena. The case law is
embedded within each chapter of this guidebook.
I have received recent positive feedback from you, our readers, about how useful and up to date this guidebook is
and how it assists you in preparing for and conducting discovery involving medical-legal issues. I take great pride in
providing you with the information needed to establish accurate WPI ratings in your cases and to assist you in
preparing your cases for discovery, trial, and settlement, including how to take depositions of injured workers and
physicians. Do not hesitate to continue giving feedback to me about the book so that we can continue to produce
the most useful and up to date material for you to refer to in your cases.
Hon. Robert G. Rassp
September 2023
Disclaimer: The material and any opinions contained in this treatise are solely those of the author and are
not the opinions of the Department of Industrial Relations, Division of Workers' Compensation, or the
WCAB, or any other entity or individual. The materials are intended to be a reference tool only and are not
meant to be relied upon as legal advice.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp About the Author
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Publication
Information
About the Author
Robert G. Rassp is a graduate of Loyola Law School class of 1981. He previously earned two undergraduate
degrees from the University of California at Irvine in 1978 at age 20.
While practicing law as an attorney, Judge Rassp handled workers' compensation and Social Security disability
cases since 1981 and was the principal of his own law firm from 1983 until April 15, 2018. On April 16, 2018, Judge
Rassp was appointed as a workers' compensation administrative law judge and assigned to the Los Angeles
WCAB District office. On December 26, 2019, Judge Rassp was appointed as the Presiding Judge of the WCAB
Los Angeles District Office. In 2017, Judge Rassp was appointed as an adjunct professor of law at Pepperdine
Caruso School of Law in Malibu, California teaching workers' compensation law as an upper division class.
In addition to his law practice, Judge Rassp was the Chair of Friends Research Institute’s West Coast Institutional
Review Board for fifteen years. The IRB is a committee consisting of eleven members that conducts the oversight of
human subject medical research under the auspices of the Food and Drug Act, 21 CFR 50, 21 CFR 56, and 45
CFR 46. In September 2005, Judge Rassp was appointed as a member of the Friends Research Institute’s Board
of Directors and was named Chairman of the strategic planning sub-committee. In October 2008, Judge Rassp was
named Chairman of the Board of Directors for FRI, effective January 1, 2009.
In addition to his duties as an attorney and medical ethicist, Judge Rassp was appointed as a member of the State
Bar Workers’ Compensation Law Section Executive Committee in April 1998 and became its Chair in 2000–2001.
Judge Rassp was reappointed as a member of the Workers’ Compensation Law Section Executive Committee in
May 2003 and is currently an advisor to the Committee, which is now the California Lawyers Association.
At the annual Division of Workers’ Compensation Educational Conferences in February and March 2010, Judge
Rassp was awarded the inaugural DWC Community Service Recognition Award for his service to the workers’
compensation community.
Judge Rassp has conducted workers’ compensation judge’s training seminars at the request of the Division of
Workers’ Compensation. Topics presented include substantial evidence in AMA Guides cases, apportionment of
permanent disability, and the integration of workers’ compensation settlements, Social Security disability, and
Medicare issues. Since the enactment of SB 899 and SB 863, Judge Rassp has conducted hundreds of seminars
for the workers’ compensation community, including the Division of Workers’ Compensation (DWC), California
Coalition for Workers Compensation, California Workers’ Compensation and Risk Conference, California Workers’
Compensation Defense Attorneys Association, State Bar of California, California Applicants’ Attorneys Association,
National Workers’ Compensation & Disability Conference & Expo, San Fernando Valley Bar Association. Orange
County Bar Association, WorkCompCentral, and other organizations.
In addition, Judge Rassp is part of the faculties for Continuing Medical Education for the California Orthopedic
Association, the California Society of Industrial Medicine & Surgery, and the California Chiropractic Association.
In 2005, Judge Rassp was a contributing author for Chapters 29 (Social Security and Medicare) and 32 (Permanent
Disability Rating Schedules) in Hanna, California Law of Employee Injuries and Workers’ Compensation
(LexisNexis® Matthew Bender), and Chapter 7 (Permanent Disability Rating Schedule) in Herlick, California
Workers’ Compensation Law (LexisNexis® Matthew Bender).
Page 2 of 2
About the Author
In addition, Judge Rassp is a contributing author to The Complete Guide to Medicare Secondary Payer Compliance
(LexisNexis). He is the editor-in-chief of the two-volume treatise, Rassp & Herlick, California Workers’
Compensation Law, Seventh Edition (LexisNexis). In 2021, Judge Rassp updated Rassp & Herlick by revising and
updating Chapters 9, 15, and 16. In addition, Judge Rassp updated all chapters of Rassp & Herlick to bring current
the WCAB Rules of Practice and Procedure (Title 8 Cal. Code Regulations Sections 10300-10999). A supplement
to Rassp & Herlick that includes the 2020 and 2022 WCAB regulations and commentary on those regulations was
published in June 2022. In August 2023, Judge Rassp is the co-author, along with Judge Clint Feddersen of the
inaugural publication, California Workers’ Compensation Discovery (LexisNexis), which is part of Rassp & Herlick,
California Workers’ Compensation Law (LexisNexis).
Judge Rassp is a member of the LexisNexis® Calif. Workers' Compensation Editorial Board and is a member of the
sub-committee for WCAB Noteworthy Panel Decisions. He is also a member of the Larson's National Workers'
Compensation Advisory Board.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp Acknowledgments
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Publication
Information
Acknowledgments
I always want to acknowledge and thank my editor, Robin Kobayashi J.D., the LexisNexis Practice Area Editor, for
her hard work, support, and elbowing me while overseeing the production of this guidebook and our other projects.
It has been 19 years since our professional relationship began and I sincerely appreciate all of her devotion to the
publisher of this and other treatises. Robin is the consummate professional, as my editor for this guidebook, as the
leader for the weekly e-news updates, my guide for the updates to Rassp & Herlick, and as the editor of the
Complete Guide to Medicare Secondary Payer Compliance, for which I wrote an update for the California section of
that treatise. And this year, she has been instrumental in guiding me through the development and publication of
our new California Workers’ Compensation Discovery handbook.
I want to acknowledge my colleagues who I have closely worked with both while I was in practice as an attorney
and now as a presiding workers’ compensation judge. I want to thank Kristen Chavez, former General Manager of
WorkCompCentral, for her leadership and vision of continuing the legacy of David DePaolo at WCC. I also wish to
acknowledge Yvonne Guilbert, Vice President emeritus of WorkCompCentral who manages the educational
programs for WCC from her residence in Florida.
I also want to thank my fellow panelists on various educational program who I worked with during the last year. This
is especially true since many of you have inspired new ideas for this guidebook and to write articles of interest to
the workers’ compensation and social security disability medical and legal communities. I want to especially
acknowledge Judge Colleen Casey, Yvonne Lang, Esq., Judge William Carero, Judge Clint Feddersen, Frank
Christine, Esq., Judge David Pollak, Negar Matian, Esq., Stuart Colburn, Esq. (even though he is from Texas);
Ronald Goldstein MD, Bella Goldstein, Jacob Rosenberg MD from CSIMS, and the leadership from the California
Orthopaedic Association, including Paul Wakim MD, all of whom I have a close working and continuing relationship
to educate the bar, claims professionals, and physicians.
Probably one of the most rewarding aspects about writing and teaching is to see your students succeed. This is true
of my students at Pepperdine Caruso School of Law. Their success is not from me—it is from them and their hard
work. Kudos to those of you who took workers’ compensation law as an elective class, passed the bar examination,
and became a “compster” like the rest of us.
I also want to acknowledge my colleagues at Friends Research Institute whose hard work, talent, and dedication to
human subject research have resulted in significant research grants from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, the National Institutes of Health and the National Institute of Drug Abuse I am extremely proud to be in
my fourteenth year as the Chairman of the Board of Directors of this IRS Section 501(c)(3) non-profit medical
research institute with operations in California and Maryland.
Finally, I want to acknowledge my musical colleagues at “CC&R:” John McNeely, a very talented musical director
and hearing rep, Jesse Bernal, Esq., Hon. William Carero, Hon. Clint Feddersen, Colleen Hjelle, and my son,
Daniel Rassp who is also a compster. In addition, I want to acknowledge our honorary members, Jay Cohen, Esq.
now retired from Mullen & Fillipi, and Jeff Vistro, Esq. former I&A Officer and currently a SCIF attorney. You guys
and gal ROCK!
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 2 of 2
Acknowledgments
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp Dedication
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Publication
Information
Dedication
I would like to dedicate this edition of Lawyer’s Guide to all of the workers’ compensation judges in the State of
California. Each and every one of them has gone beyond the call of duty during the last four years. Each took an
oath to uphold the Constitution of the State of California and the U.S. Constitution. Embedded within the California
Constitution is the mandate to provide substantial justice in every case. Despite the fears and changes made due to
the pandemic, each and every judge has continued to hear cases, issue decisions, approve settlements and
resolve disputes despite the hardships of not being able to do so in person. I especially want to acknowledge and
dedicate this edition to the new judges who started their judicial career since March 2020. Do you, our readers,
realize that probably 33% of the judges have never held an in-person hearing until October 2021? I think all of us
judges are always on a learning curve.
We are now in the process of making some of our practices that began during the pandemic using virtual platforms
permanent, including remote conferences and service of documents by email. New judges had to be trained
virtually as well and they have done an outstanding job of learning remotely and judging remotely. I think everyone
prefers live in-person trials. Remember, becoming a judge is voluntary and is very competitive. We have hired the
cream of the crop so to speak and everyone deserves credit for their commitment.
Finally, I want to dedicate this book to three fellow judges who have left their mark on the vast majority of the 200
judges in California—Presiding Judge Robert Hjelle, Judge Lisa Sussman, and Judge Roger Tolman. Both Judge
Hjelle and Judge Sussman have trained over 150 judges during their one-week mandatory training program for new
judges. Judge Sussman was appointed in 2022 to work as a judge for the Appeals Board and to mediate cases that
are on Reconsideration before the Appeals Board. Presiding Judge Hjelle is dedicated to assisting a new
generation of new judge training, and we all appreciate his devotion to our workers’ compensation community for
decades. Judge Tolman has trained every judge on the judge’s side of the EAMS system. You three judges all rock!
Thank you for your commitment to make this all work for us and for the entire workers’ compensation community.
And my congratulations to Presiding Judge Suzanne Banks and Presiding Judge Paul DeWeese for your
appointment in 2022 to conduct new judge training going forward. I am already lining up some new WCJs to train
for me at LAO. Remember our motto: “LAO ROCKS!”
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp Publication Update
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  What's New
The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers’
Compensation, 2024 Edition Update
The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers’ Compensation, 2024 Edition
Publication 1432   Release 19   December 2023
Highlights
Ch. 3, AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
Updated COVID-19 information; eye injuries
Ch. 5. Application of AMA Guides and 2005 PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
Updated with discussion of both Nunes en banc decisions
Ch. 6, Case Summaries With Commentary and Current Issues Affecting Permanent Disability Ratings
Updated with case law developments
Ch. 9, Psychiatric Injuries
Updated information regarding DSM-5 TR, which was issued in late 2022 by the American Psychiatric Association.
The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers’ Compensation is organized as follows:
• Chapter 1 contains definitions of common terms and a list of acronyms along with explanatory material, as
well as a list of common medical conditions by AMA Guides chapter.
• Chapter 2 covers the effects of SB 899 and SB 863 reform legislation and the application of the AMA Guides
to California workers’ compensation cases, and teaches you how to do a rating string under the 2005
PDRS and “2013 PDRS.”
• Chapter 3 is a chapter-by-chapter analysis of the AMA Guides.
• Chapter 4 contains examples of AMA compliant and non-AMA compliant medical reports and a discussion
about developing the record to establish accurate WPI ratings under the AMA Guides 5th Edition.
• Chapter 5 provides a summary of how SB 863 affects your law practice, including changes in the law that
affect permanent disability payments, supplemental job displacement benefits and the Return To Work
fund. Some examples of how to rate specific types of injuries are included.
• Chapter 6 contains summaries of cases and WCAB panel decisions relating to the AMA Guides, the 2005
PDRS, and apportionment, along with expert commentary.
• Chapter 7 provides a framework for discovery in cases that involve the AMA Guides and covers medical-legal
issues related to rebutting a strict impairment rating under the AMA Guides 5th edition.
Page 2 of 2
Publication Update
• Chapter 8 provides medical information every lawyer and judge should know about specific parts and regions
of the body we commonly see in our cases.
• Chapter 9 provides a detailed discussion of psychiatric injuries—how they are now diagnosed under the DSM-
5, how and when they can be rated for permanent impairment, possible alternative rating methods not
using the GAF scale, and apportionment issues.
• Appendix A contains the 2005 PDRS, which is reprinted in full for your convenience. Note: Until the
Administrative Director adopts an official 2013 PDRS, SB 863 mandates reference to the adjustments for
occupation and age in the 2005 PDRS.
• Appendix C contains updated “money charts” (permanent disability rates) for quick reference. We thank Jay
Shergill, Esq. for allowing us to reprint his tables in our publication.
• The Index is organized by topic and helps you quickly find what you need in this guidebook.
While practicing law as an attorney, Presiding Judge Robert G. Rassp handled workers’ compensation and social
security disability cases since 1981. He was the Chair for the State Bar Workers’ Compensation Law Section
Executive Committee in 2000–2001. He has conducted workers’ compensation seminars and judge’s training on a
variety of topics, including the AMA Guides, and is a frequent speaker at State Bar workers’ compensation
seminars. Mr. Rassp also serves on the LexisNexis® California Workers’ Compensation Editorial Board and the
Larson’s National Workers’ Compensation Advisory Board. He is also the Editor-in-Chief of the two-volume treatise
Rassp & Herlick, California Workers’ Compensation Law (LexisNexis).
* * * * *
FREE eNEWSLETTER: Sign up today to receive our free eNewsletter, which covers California workers’
compensation issues and trends. Get the competitive advantage on the latest developments and much more. Sign
up at www.lexisnexis.com/wcnews.
The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers’ Compensation, 2024 Edition
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp CHAPTER 1.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 1
How to Use This Guidebook
CHAPTER 1 How to Use This Guidebook
§ 1.01  Purpose and Organization of This Guidebook
§ 1.02  AMA Guides—Frequently Used Terms
§ 1.03  AMA Guides—Common Acronyms
§ 1.04  AMA Guides—Common Medical Conditions by AMA Guides Chapter
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 1.01
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 1
How to Use This Guidebook
§ 1.01 Purpose and Organization of This Guidebook
This guidebook has been updated extensively each year since 2006 and is intended to educate and familiarize the
workers’ compensation community with the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairments, 5th Edition (AMA
Guides) and to describe its application to California workers’ compensation cases. California law mandated the use
of the AMA Guides for the first time in April 2004 for injuries occurring on or after January 1, 2005 pursuant to
Senate Bill 899 and Labor Code § 4660. In 2012, the legislature passed SB 863, which includes Labor Code
§ 4660.1 that also mandates use of the AMA Guides 5th Edition for industrial injuries occurring on or after January
1, 2013.
This guidebook also includes some observations about the AMA Guides that are intended to assist you in learning
and understanding them and to help you formulate questions to doctors about them. There are examples of
common mistakes doctors make in their reports so that counsel can learn from those mistakes and bring them to
the attention of treating and evaluating physicians. There is a new section called “Questions Doctors Ask Us” which
are questions asked during mandatory continuing medical education programs [see Ch. 6, § 6.03]. This section is
intended to improve the dialogue between legal practitioners and medical evaluators so that each profession can
obtain common ground when evaluating injured workers for medical-legal purposes unique in a California workers’
compensation case.
For the purpose of this guidebook, the permanent disability rating schedule adopted in April 1997 will be referred to
as the “1997 PDRS” or the “1997 Rating Schedule.” The schedule adopted by the Administrative Director on
1/1/2005 will be referred to as the “2005 PDRS.” Finally, the permanent disability rating schedule for injuries
occurring on or after 1/1/2013 will be referred to as the “2013 PDRS.” For the first time in memory, attorneys, claims
administrators and judges will have to be familiar with three permanent disability rating schedules at the same time,
depending upon the date of injury for each claim. Believe it or not, a case went to trial at the WCAB where the 1997
PDRS applied and this was during 2021. There was no DEU rater who knew how to rate the permanent disability in
the case so the trial judge had to do the rating.
Chapters 1 through 3 reflect what we call a “pure” or “strict” interpretation of the descriptions and measurements of
the AMA Guides 5th Edition. Chapter 4 covers substantial medical evidence and establishing accurate WPI ratings.
Chapters 5 through 7 cover some case law and examples of the use of the AMA Guides in our cases. Chapter 8
covers medical information for specific parts and regions of the body we commonly see in workers’ compensation
cases. Chapter 9 covers psychiatric injuries, the diagnoses under the 2013 DSM-5, how and when psyche injuries
are rated for permanent disability, and possible alternative rating methods of psychiatric impairment. Significant
case law is also included that pertains to the prosecution and defense of psychiatric cases.
A “strict” interpretation of the Guides is one in which a physician utilizes his or her own specialty and the tables,
figures and text of the Guides that pertain to their specific specialty. For example, an orthopedic surgeon will use
Chapters 15, 16, and 17 to evaluate a case and will interpret the Guides in accordance with standards established
by the DEU raters and with strict adherence to the specific instructions of the use of the Guides. In fact, case law
mandates that a physician first evaluate permanent impairment when an injured worker reaches “maximum medical
improvement” using the proper Chapter of the AMA Guides that reflects the major permanent impairment. So a
permanent impairment to the spine must first be assessed under Chapter 15, The Spine, while a knee impairment
must be determined under Chapter 17, The Lower Extremities [Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp.
Page 2 of 3
§ 1.01 Purpose and Organization of This Guidebook
Appeals Bd. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837 (“Guzman
III”)].
Prior editions of this guidebook referred to the 2005 permanent disability rating schedule as “the new PDRS.”
Sixteen years later, we are still referring to the 2005 PDRS as “new” and the schedule that applies to injuries on or
after 1/1/13 also as “new.” This is contextual since this author practiced workers’ compensation law using earlier
versions of the PDRS, including the 1988 and 1997 PDRS, which were pretty much the same. It is now approaching
2022 and we are still using the essential elements of the 2005 PDRS. This guidebook will not delve into describing
how to use the 1997 PDRS since very few cases are pending where that schedule applies. If you have a case that
needs a permanent disability rating under the 1997 PDRS, find someone who is old to assist you!
In any event, the Disability Evaluation Unit (DEU) of the Division of Workers’ Compensation refers to both the 2005
PDRS and the 2013 PDRS to distinguish the difference between the two schedules even though the latter is
derived from the former with only one difference. The 2005 PDRS has eight adjustment factors for loss of earnings
and the 2013 PDRS has only one adjustment factor. See Ch. 2 of this guidebook.
This guidebook is organized as follows:
• Ch. 1 contains definitions of common terms and a list of acronyms along with explanatory material, as well as
a list of common medical conditions by AMA Guides chapter.
• Ch. 2 covers the effects of SB 899 and SB 863 reform legislation and the application of the AMA Guides to
California workers’ compensation cases. This chapter teaches you how to do a rating string under the 2005
PDRS and 2013 PDRS. There is a new section on writing advocacy or joint QME or AME letters along with
a template of the elements in a fully compliant medical-legal report.
• Ch. 3 is a chapter-by-chapter analysis of the AMA Guides. Continuing in this edition of the guidebook is a
section on common mistakes and errors to watch out for in medical reports from treating and evaluating
doctors that pertain to the determination of WPI ratings under the AMA Guides.
• Ch. 4 contains examples of AMA compliant and non-AMA compliant medical reports and a discussion about
developing the record to establish accurate WPI ratings under the AMA Guides 5th Edition.
• Ch. 5 provides a summary of how SB 863 affects your law practice, including changes in the law that affect
permanent disability payments, supplemental job displacement benefits and the Return To Work fund.
Some examples of how to rate specific types of injuries are included.
• Ch. 6 has some summaries of noteworthy cases and WCAB panel decisions relating to the AMA Guides, the
2005 PDRS, and apportionment, along with expert commentary. There is a new section on apportionment
of permanent disability which consolidates the discussion of that issue from throughout the guidebook into
one reference point.
• Ch. 7 provides a framework for discovery in cases that involve the AMA Guides and covers medical-legal
issues related to rebutting a strict impairment rating under the AMA Guides 5th edition.
• Ch. 8 provides medical information every lawyer and judge should know about specific parts and regions of
the body we commonly see in our cases.
• Ch. 9 provides a detailed discussion of psychiatric injuries—how they are now diagnosed under the DSM-5,
how and when they can be rated for permanent impairment, possible alternative rating methods not using
the GAF scale, and apportionment issues.
• App. A contains the 2005 PDRS, which is reprinted in full for your convenience. Until the Administrative
Director adopts an updated PDRS, SB 863 mandates reference to the adjustments for occupation and age
in the 2005 PDRS as more specifically described in Chapter 2.
• App. C contains permanent disability rates, also known as the “money chart.”
• The Index is organized by topic and helps you quickly find what you need in this guidebook.
Page 3 of 3
§ 1.01 Purpose and Organization of This Guidebook
PRACTICE POINT:
We have expanded the chapter-by-chapter analysis of the AMA Guides 5th Edition for your reference in this
guidebook. Make certain you follow all of the instructions in this guidebook for determining permanent
impairment under the AMA Guides along with how permanent disability is calculated under the applicable
permanent disability rating schedule.
There are sections in Chapter 3 of this guidebook that will assist you in evaluating cases with unusual
medical conditions that are ratable under the AMA Guides that we are seeing in our cases and in which
physicians have struggled to correctly apply the Guides. Be sure to read the new section in Chapter 3 that
describes common mistakes made by physicians in determining WPI ratings. Your awareness of those
common mistakes will assist you in being able to cross-examine a physician effectively or to properly
request a supplemental report, a replacement QME panel, an additional QME panel or a request for a judge
to appoint a “regular physician” pursuant to Labor Code § 5701. ■
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 1.02
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 1
How to Use This Guidebook
§ 1.02 AMA Guides—Frequently Used Terms
The following is a list of frequently used terms that are used throughout this guidebook.
Activities of Daily Living (ADL)—See Table 1-2 of AMA Guides, p. 4. The physician must determine the effect of
an impairment on a person’s ADLs including personal hygiene, non-specialized hand activities, sleep,
communication, walking, standing, sitting, and sexual functioning.
Age adjustment—See 2005 PDRS, pp. 6-2 through 6-5. The whole person impairment rating is adjusted for the
loss of future earning capacity, age and occupation in order to calculate permanent disability. This rule applies to
injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2005 and before 1/1/2013 for the 2005 PDRS and injuries occurring on or after
1/1/2013, but without the adjustment for loss of future earning capacity for these injuries.
Allodynia—A condition in which ordinarily non-painful stimuli causes pain. A perceived pain that is out of proportion
to the underlying insult.
Anatomic loss—A loss of a body part due to injury or disease process, e.g., amputated hand or finger; full loss of
kidney function.
Angina—A severe often constricting pain. Angina pectoris is severe constricting chest pain that radiates into the left
shoulder and down the arm as a result of ischemia of the heart muscle caused by coronary heart disease.
Ankylosis—Stiffening or fixation of a joint as a result of a disease process, with fibrous or bony union across the
joint.
Arthrodesis—The stiffening of a joint by operative means.
Arthroplasty—Creation of an artificial joint to correct ankylosis; an operation to restore as far as possible the
integrity and function of a joint. Surgical removal of a diseased joint or a part thereof with or without an implant to
replace the joint.
Catastrophic injury—Term referred to in Labor Code § 4660.1 under SB 863 that allows an increase in a
permanent disability rating for psychiatric injury that is a compensable consequence of a physical injury. Case law
has developed a definition outside of those referred to in section 4660.1, such as loss of a limb, burn injuries,
paralysis, or brain injuries.
Causalgia—Persistent severe burning sensation usually after injury to a peripheral nerve (median, tibial) or brachial
plexus accompanied by trophic changes (interruption of nerve supply).
Claudication—Limping; intermittent claudication is caused by ischemia of the muscles with attacks of lameness
and pain, usually brought on by walking, located in calf muscles but can occur in other muscle groups.
Clinical evaluation—The method of conducting a medical examination on a patient by a physician—to include past
medical history, current  complaints, physical examination, lab tests, findings, and conclusions, including
recommendations for further evaluation and/or treatment. See also AD Rule 10606 [8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10606] that
lists the requirements of a medical report.
Page 2 of 5
§ 1.02 AMA Guides—Frequently Used Terms
Clinical judgment—The term used for a physician to use in order to determine the existence or non-existence of a
medical condition, diagnosis, prognosis, impairment rating, and apportionment. Clinical judgment is based on the
physician’s education, knowledge, experience, skills, and ability to evaluate a patient. It results from a combination
of observance, diagnostic testing, physical measurements and patient responses. See Ch. 5, § 5.08 of this
guidebook.
Combined Values Chart—See AMA Guides, pp. 604–606. The Chart is based on the formula: a + b(1.00 − a),
where a and b are decimal equivalents of the impairment or disability percentages. (See 2005 PDRS, p. 1-10). The
multiple disabilities table is no longer used in the 2005 PDRS.
Contracture—A permanent shortening producing loss of motion, deformity or distortion as of muscle, tendon or
scar tissue.
COVID-19—The disease caused by the new corona virus that is thought to be zootonic in origin and began in
Yuhan, China in December 2019 and spread throughout the world including the United States. Also called SARS-
CoV-2 2019. (SARS is Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome). Symptoms include high fever, dry cough, and
shortness of breath. The condition can be hospital acquired or community acquired, especially by health care
providers and first responders.
Crepitation—Crackling sound or sensation felt over a bone fracture; noise or vibration produced by rubbing bone
or irregular cartilage surfaces moving together as in moving a knee cap over an arthritic knee joint.
Disability—Limitations in the performance of personal, social, and occupational functioning due to an impairment.
(See AMA Guides, pp. 8–9). Physicians no longer determine permanent disability in AMA Guides cases—only
whole person impairment is determined.
Disfigurement—An altered or abnormal appearance of a body part.
Dysesthesia—Impairment or reduced sensitivity, especially to touch.
Dyspnea—Shortness of breath, distress in breathing.
Dysthymia—Chronic mood disorder manifested by depression most of the day, more days than not, with some of
the following symptoms: poor appetite or overeating, insomnia or hypersomnia, low energy or fatigue, low self-
esteem, poor concentration, difficulty making decisions, and feelings of hopelessness.
Employability—The ability for a person to obtain employment despite the existence of an impairment.
Evidence Based Medicine—Is a misleading term that was coined by the folks at ACOEM and in academia. It
means medical procedures and treatment protocols that have been supported by clinical trials and controlled
clinical research. There are different levels of EB medicine that reflect the quality of the underlying research. The
levels of quality are given letter grades from an “A” (full clinical trial that is double blind, placebo controlled, large
statistically significant number of participants in the research, peer reviewed and published in a nationally
recognized publication, sponsor is not the manufacturer of drug, biologic or procedure, etc.). There are very few
clinically controlled studies to point to in ACOEM because it is unethical to conduct a double blind study in say, a
surgical procedure where the control group gets an incision but nothing else, and the study group gets the surgical
procedure and you compare the clinical results.
A “B” may be the same but involves a smaller clinical study, maybe no placebo, not a large sample population, and
not mentioned in a highly respected publication. A “C” grade probably is not double blind, and is definitely not
placebo controlled. “D” means not published or placebo, but works in some clinical treatment settings. “IN” means
insufficient evidence of effectiveness of the treatment, drug or device.
These are subjective definitions since there are no FDA regulations. The problem is that the folks at ACOEM will
give a grade of “insufficient evidence” if a medical procedure is effective in one out of six patients, whereas
orthopedic surgeons would say the standard of care is if a procedure helps one out of ten or even more. This is the
Page 3 of 5
§ 1.02 AMA Guides—Frequently Used Terms
politics of medicine and why the orthopedic surgeons stayed out of the discussions with the ACOEM folks because
they did not want to lower their standard of care.
Evidence-based medicine is not in the AMA Guides per se, but the authors of the Guides would like to believe their
conclusions are from EB medicine.
Functional Capacity Assessment—The determination of a person’s physical abilities despite the existence of an
impairment. It is used in Social Security disability evaluations and is now required to be used by treating physicians
in workers’ compensation claims when a patient is determined to have reached maximum medical improvement.
(See Admin. Dir. Rule 9785.4, Form PR-4, and Title 8 Cal. Code Regulations, Form 10133.36 “Physician’s Return-
To-Work & Voucher Report.”). Thus far, there has been resistance by physicians to conduct a functional capacity
assessment. Many physicians erroneously believe the assessments need to be performed by a physical therapist
even though a physician is the most qualified to determine a person’s residual functional capacity despite having an
impairment.
Functional loss—The loss of use of a body part, body organ, or body function.
Future earning capacity adjustment—Referred to as the “FEC’ in the 2005 PDRS, pp. 1-6 to 1-7. There are eight
possible FEC adjustments used to convert whole person impairment into a permanent disability rating. Each FEC
adjustment is indexed to a part of body injured that affects a person’s earning capacity differently than other injured
body parts. The FEC adjustments are based upon empirical evidence submitted to the Administrative Director who
adopted the current eight adjustments in the PDRS operative as of 1/1/2005. There is no “FEC” adjustment per se
in the 2013 PDRS—there is a 1.4 multiplier adjustment factor instead of one of eight FEC adjustments.
Ground-glass opacities—A description of how a CAT scan, plain X-ray, or MRI scan demonstrates areas within
the lungs that are the result of COVID-19 and other lung infections. Infections can cause an immune system
response that result in inflammation of lung parenchyma and deposits of detritus into the air sacs (aveoli). What
should appear to be clear black outline of lung has clouds of haze that is referred to as ground-glass opacities.
Hyperalgesia—Extreme sensitivity to painful stimuli.
Hypertrophy—General increase in bulk of a body part or organ, not caused by a tumor. E.G. left ventricular
hypertrophy, which is an enlarged left lower heart chamber usually caused by chronic hypertension.
Impairment—The loss, loss of use, or derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function. (See AMA
Guides Chapter 1).
Impairment aggravation—The permanent increase in the loss, loss of use, or derangement of any body part,
organ system, or organ function.
Ischemia—Local anemia usually due to mechanical obstruction (usually arterial narrowing) of the blood supply.
Lower extremity—The legs, including the hip joints. There are references in the AMA Guides to regional
impairments—in this case, the foot, hindfoot, ankle, lower leg, knee, thigh, and hip.
Malingering—A psychiatric term that requires being diagnosed by a psychiatrist or other qualified mental health
professional. (See the DSM-IV TR, mentioned in § 1.03 of this chapter).
Maximum medical improvement—A condition or state that is well stabilized and unlikely to change substantially in
the next year, with or without medical treatment. There may be some change, but further recovery or deterioration is
not anticipated. The term was first used in California workers’ compensation cases when the AMA Guides 5th
Edition was adopted for use. It technically means that the injured worker’s ADL functioning has stabilized with or
without medical treatment and has reached the point where permanent impairment can be established. Compare
with the definition of “permanent and stationary.” (See AD Rule 9785(a)(8) [8 Cal. Code Reg. § 9785(a)(8)]).
Neuralgia—Pain of a severe, throbbing or stabbing character in the course or distribution of a nerve.
Page 4 of 5
§ 1.02 AMA Guides—Frequently Used Terms
Occupational adjustment—See 2005 PDRS, pp. 3-2 through 5-3.
Occupational variants—See 2005 PDRS, pp. 5-2 and 5-3.
Occupations and group numbers—See 2005 PDRS, pp. 5-2 and 5-3.
Osteochondritis—Inflammation of a bone and its cartilage.
Osteophyte—A bony outgrowth or protruberance.
Pain adjustments—See AMA Guides Chapter 18, p. 573; 2005 PDRS, p. 1-12.
Pain disability index—See AMA Guides Chapter 18, p. 573. The pain disability index is not used in our 2005
PDRS; the physician is only allowed to add up to 3% WPI for pain that is greater than expected from the WPI rating.
Paresthesia—An abnormal sensation such as burning, pricking, tingling, or tickling.
Paroxymal—A sudden onset of a symptom or disease, especially one with recurrent manifestations such as the
chills; a sharp spasm or convulsion. The term is usually associated with unexpected episodes of epilepsy or
seizures.
Permanent impairment—See Impairment, above.
Permanent and stationary—Term of art that means that a medical condition has stabilized and the injured
employee can return to the open labor market and/or his or her permanent disability can be established. This term
usually means the injured worker’s medical condition is not getting any worse or any better. Contrast with the
definition of Maximum Medical Improvement, as stated above.
Presbyacusis—Loss of ability to perceive or discriminate sounds as part of the aging process; the pattern and age
of onset may vary.
Radiculopathy—Disorder of the spinal nerve roots. Same meaning as “radiculitis.” There are 31 pairs of spinal
nerves, each attached to the spinal cord by two roots, one ventral (anterior) and the other dorsal (posterior). The
two roots unite in the intervertebral foramen (an opening in the bone).
Regional impairment—Impairment to the same body region, such as the spine, upper extremity, including the
shoulder, or lower extremity, including the hips.
Spondylarthritis—Inflammation of the intervertebral articulations.
Spondylitis—Inflammation of one or more of the vertebrae.
Spondylolisthesis—Forward or backward movement of the body of one of the lower lumbar vertebrae on the
vertebrae below it, or upon the sacrum.
Spondylosis—Ankylosis of the vertebrae, often applied non-specifically to any lesion of the spine of a degenerative
nature.
Sub-region—Parts of body that comprise a region, e.g., the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar areas are sub-regions of
the spine. (See AMA Guides Chapter 15).
SWAG—Scientific Wild-Assed Guess.
Syncope—Loss of consciousness and postural tone caused by diminished cerebral blood flow.
Upper extremity—The fingers, thumb, hand, wrist, forearm, elbow, upper arm, and shoulder joint.
Page 5 of 5
§ 1.02 AMA Guides—Frequently Used Terms
Varus—Of, relating to, or being a deformity in which an anatomical part (usually a leg or a foot) is turned inward
toward the midline of the body to an abnormal degree. A varus knee is bowed.
Valgus—Turned outward; of, relating to, or being a deformity in which an anatomical part (usually a leg or foot) is
turned outward away from the midline of the body to an abnormal degree. A valgus knee is like “knock-knee.”
Weird-assed Medical Condition—Medical conditions that we see in our cases where physicians have no clue how
to rate them under the AMA Guides, such as asthma, diabetes, hearing loss, eye injuries, cosmetic injuries, joint
replacements, hernias, shoulder, and knee injuries.
Whole person—The scale from 0% to 100% impairment, when 100% means the person is dead or comatose. The
upper extremities are each 60% of the whole person; the lower extremities are each 40% of the whole person.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 1.03
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 1
How to Use This Guidebook
§ 1.03 AMA Guides—Common Acronyms
The following is a list of common acronyms referred to in this guidebook.
ADL—activities of daily living
AMA—American Medical Association
AWL—actual wage loss
AWW—average weekly wages
C—a boldfaced “C” used in this Guidebook denotes the mathematical symbol in the 2005 PDRS for combining
impairment percentages; it tells you to use the Combined Values Chart (See 2005 PDRS, p. 7-2) (cf. “C” (not
boldfaced), which relates to an Occupational Variant)
CHSWC—California Commission on Health and Safety and Workers’ Compensation
CRPS—complex regional pain syndrome
CTS—carpal tunnel syndrome
DBE—diagnostic-based estimates
DCO—diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide
DEU—Disability Evaluation Unit
DIP—distal interphalangeal joint
DRE—diagnosis-related estimates
DSM-IV—Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (Note: DSM-IV was recently revised
and is called DSM-IV TR (“text revised”))
DVT—deep vein thrombosis
EBM—evidence-based medicine
EDD—California Employment Development Department
FAS—functional acuity score
FEC—future earning capacity
FEV1—forced expiratory volume in the first second
FFS—functional field score
Page 2 of 3
§ 1.03 AMA Guides—Common Acronyms
FL—functional limitation
FVC—forced vital capacity
GAF—global assessment of functioning (indicated in Axis V in DSM-IV diagnosis) (See also 2005 PDRS, pp. 1-12
through 1-16)
IP—interphalangeal joint
IQR—inter-quartile range
LEC—loss of earning capacity
LEI—lower extremity impairment
MET—resting/exercise metabolic energy testing (See AMA Guides Chapter 3)
MDT—multiple disabilities table
MMI—maximum medical improvement
NCCI—National Council on Compensation Insurance
NCV—nerve conduction velocity testing
ND—nonwork disability
NEL—noneconomic loss
NSAIDS—non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
NYHA—New York Heart Association
OCC—occupation
PCR—prevention, compensation, and rehabilitation
PDRS—permanent disability rating schedule
PI—permanent impairment
PIP—proximal interphalangeal joint
PPD—permanent partial disability
P&S—permanent and stationary
PTHS—post-traumatic head syndrome
PTSD—post-traumatic stress syndrome
RADS—reactive airways dysfunction syndrome
RAND—Rand Corporation
RFC—residual functional capacity
ROM—range of motion
Page 3 of 3
§ 1.03 AMA Guides—Common Acronyms
RSD—reflex sympathetic dystrophy
SIADH—syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
SLR—straight leg raising test
SWAG—scientific wild-ass guess
TTD—temporary total disability
TPD—temporary partial disability
UEI—upper extremity impairment
UI—unemployment insurance
VAS—visual acuity score
VFS—visual field score
WCIRB—California Workers’ Compensation Insurance Rating Bureau
WD—work disability
WL—wage loss
WLDI—Work Loss Data Institute
WPI—whole person impairment scale
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 1.04
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 1
How to Use This Guidebook
§ 1.04 AMA Guides—Common Medical Conditions by AMA Guides Chapter
The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in specific chapters of the AMA
Guides. There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple chapters
of the AMA Guides. For example, diabetes can be found in AMA Guides Chapter 10, but some consequences of
diabetes can be found in other chapters, such as diabetic retinopathy (AMA Guides Chapter 12, The Visual
System), diabetic neuropathies (AMA Guides Chapters 16 and 17, The Upper Extremities and The Lower
Extremities, respectively, and AMA Guides Chapter 13, Central and Peripheral Nervous System).
The common medical conditions listed below are of course not a comprehensive list of all medical conditions that
can be work related. However, it is a reference for you to use to see where in the Guides you can find a reference
to a specific medical condition. As one orthopedic surgeon told us, the AMA Guides has three chapters on
orthopedic conditions but in fact orthopedic medical conditions are described in three volumes of medical texts. In
light of established case law that allows physicians to utilize the descriptions and measurements of all chapters of
the AMA Guides 5th edition and perhaps other publications by the AMA or other nationally accepted methods of
evaluating permanent impairments, the list below should be used as a beginning point in the analysis of how a
work-related medical condition can be rated for permanent impairment.
However, note that the AMA Guides do not have impairment ratings for infections, solid organ transplants, or
cancer, with the exception of lung (Chapter 5) and skin (Chapter 8) cancers.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 3: THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM: HEART AND AORTA
• HEART
• ARRYTHMIAS (e.g., ATRIAL FIBRILLATION)
• MYOCARDIAL INFARCTIONS (HEART ATTACKS)
• CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
• CORONARY BY-PASS SURGERY
• MITRAL, TRICUSPID, AORTIC VALVE DISORDERS
• CARDIOMYOPATHIES
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 4: THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM: SYSTEMIC AND PULMONARY ARTERIES
• HYPERTENSION
• ANEURYSMS
• THROMBOPHLEBITIS
• PULMONARY EMBOLISMS
• LEFT VENTRICULAR HYPERTROPHY (LVH)
• DEEP VEIN THROMBOSIS (DVT)
• RAYNAUD’S PHENOMENON
Page 2 of 5
§ 1.04 AMA Guides—Common Medical Conditions by AMA Guides Chapter
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 5: THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
• ASTHMA
• COVID-19 INFECTION
• LUNG CANCER
• EMPHYSEMA
• ASBESTOSIS
• SLEEP APNEA
• HYPERSENSITIVITY/ALLERGIES
• CHEMICAL EXPOSURES
• DYSPNEA (SHORTNESS OF BREATH)
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 6: THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
• DUODENAL/PEPTIC ULCERS
• ESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE (GERD)
• HIATAL HERNIAS
• ABDOMINAL HERNIAS
• INGUINAL HERNIAS
• ULCERATIVE COLITIS
• HEPATITIS
• CROHN’S DISEASE
• IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME
• ABNORMAL LIVER FUNCTION (SIDE EFFECTS OF MEDICATIONS)
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 7: THE URINARY AND REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS
• HERNIAS
• SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION
• NEUROGENIC BLADDAR (FAILED LUMBAR SURGERY)
• KIDNEY DAMAGE (SIDE EFFECTS OF MEDICATION)
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 8: THE SKIN
• DERMATITIS
• UTICARIA (HIVES)
• LATEX ALLERGIES
• CHEMICAL EXPOSURES
• BURNS
• SCARRING/DISFIGUREMENTS
• CANCER
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 9: THE HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
• ANEMIA
Page 3 of 5
§ 1.04 AMA Guides—Common Medical Conditions by AMA Guides Chapter
• LEUKEMIA
• THROMBOCYTOPENIA (CHEMICAL OR MEDICATION RELATED)
• HIV/AIDS INFECTION
• HODGKIN’S DISEASE
• WHITE BLOOD CELL DISORDERS
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 10: THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
• DIABETES
• THYROID CONDITIONS
• PARATHYROID CONDITIONS
• ADRENAL CONDITIONS
• OSTEOPOROSIS
• CUSHING’S DISEASE
• ADDISON’S DISEASE
• HYPOGLYCEMIA
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 11: EAR, NOSE, THROAT, AND RELATED STRUCTURES
• HEARING LOSS
• SPEECH DEFICITS
• VOCAL CORD DAMAGE
• LABYRINTHITIS
• VESTIBULAR DISORDERS (DIZZINESS, BALANCE)
• CANCER
• TMJ (TEMPORAL-MANDUBULAR JOINT) DISORDERS
• VERTIGO
• POSTURAL INSTABILITY (BALANCE AND STATION DISORDERS)
• DISFIGUREMENT
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 12: THE VISUAL SYSTEM
• LOSS OF VISUAL ACUITY
• LOSS OF FIELD OF VISION
• ENUCLEATION
• MACULAR DEGENERATION
• DIABETIC RETINOPATHIES
• DETACHED RETINA
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 13: THE CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
• SLEEP DISORDERS
• HEAD INJURIES
• REGIONAL PERIPHERAL NERVE (ENTIRE ARM OR LEG)
Page 4 of 5
§ 1.04 AMA Guides—Common Medical Conditions by AMA Guides Chapter
• CONCUSSIONS
• SLEEP APNEA
• NARCOLEPSY
• TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
• CEREBRAL VASCULAR ACCIDENTS (STROKES)
• TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ACCIDENTS
• OPTIC NEURITIS
• SEIZURES
• DEMENTIA
• ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
• POST-TRAUMATIC EPILEPSY
• PARKINSON’S DISEASE
• TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA
• CHRONIC REGIONAL PAIN SYNDROME (CRPS)—RSD AND CAUSALGIA
• NEUROPATHIC PAIN DISORDERS
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 14: MENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS
• REFER TO THE DSM IV-TR OR DSM-5 FOR PROPER DIAGNOSES
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 15: THE SPINE
• ALL DISORDERS INVOLVING THE CERVICAL SPINE, THORACIC SPINE, LUMBAR SPINE; SACRUM,
PELVIS AND CORTICOSPINAL TRACT
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 16: THE UPPER EXTREMITIES
• ALL DISORDERS INVOLVING THE SHOULDERS, UPPER ARM, ELBOW, FOREARM, WRIST, HAND,
THUMB AND FINGERS
• RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS INVOLVING THE HANDS
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 17: THE LOWER EXTREMITIES
• ALL DISORDERS INVOLVING THE FEET, HINDFEET, ANKLES, LEGS, KNEES, HIPS AND PELVIS
• ALL ARTHRITIC CONDITIONS INVOLVING A JOINT
• DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE (DJD)
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
Page 5 of 5
§ 1.04 AMA Guides—Common Medical Conditions by AMA Guides Chapter
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp CHAPTER 2.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 2
Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
CHAPTER 2 Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
§ 2.01  The Effects of Reform Legislation
[1]  SB 863
[2]  SB 899
§ 2.02  Overview of Permanent Disability Rating Schedules
[1]  Organization of 2005 PDRS
[2]  Comparison to 1997 Rating Schedule
[3]  Basic Components of 2005 PDRS
[4]  Multiple-Step Process for Determining Permanent Disability for Injuries Between 2005 and 12/31/12
[5]  Updated Rand Study
[6]  Calculating Permanent Disability for Injuries On or After 1/1/2013
§ 2.03  Application of AMA Guides to California Workers’ Compensation Cases
§ 2.04  Compliance of Medical Reports With Requirements of AMA Guides
§ 2.05  Pain Adjustments
§ 2.06  Psychiatric Injuries
[1]  Generally
[2]  Ratings
[3]  Elimination of DSM-IV TR and New DSM-5
[4]  Determination of WPI Ratings Using the GAF Score
[5]  Informal Ratings and Formal Rating Instructions in an AMA Guides Case
[a]  Informal Ratings and the Roles of Judges and Raters
[b]  Formal Rating Instructions
[i]  The Roles of Judges and Raters
Page 2 of 2
Synopsis to CHAPTER 2 : Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
[ii]  Seven Methods of Rating Instructions—The Blackledge Case
[A]  WCAB’s Six Guidelines for Formal Rating Instructions
[B]  Physician Ground Rules
[C]  WCJ Ground Rules
[D]  Rater Ground Rules
[E]  Parties’ Ground Rules
[F]  Practical Considerations
[G]  Requesting Cross Examination of the Rater or Objecting to Formal Rating Instructions
[c]  Apportionment
[d]  Cross-Examination of Raters
§ 2.07  Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
[1]  Introduction
[2]  Advocacy Letters
[3]  Joint AME or PQME Letters
[4]  Advocacy PQME Letters
[5]  Required Elements in an AMA Compliant Medical Report
[6]  Template for DWC Compliant Medical-Legal Reports for Musculoskeletal Evaluations Using the
AMA Guides
[7]  Templates for Letters
[a]  In General
[b]  Model Joint AME Letter Pursuant to Labor Code Section 4062.2
[c]  Model Joint or Advocacy Panel QME Letter Pursuant to Labor Code Section 4062.2
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 2.01
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 2
Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
§ 2.01 The Effects of Reform Legislation
[1] SB 863
This chapter will describe how to develop and calculate a permanent disability rating using the AMA Guides and
the applicable permanent disability rating schedule (PDRS). For injuries occurring between January 1, 2005
and prior to January 1, 2013, you will use the 2005 PDRS [see Appendix A of this guidebook]. Some dates of
injury occurring prior to January 1, 2005 will also be evaluated using the 2005 PDRS [see Lab. Code § 4660(d)].
For injuries occurring on or after January 1, 2013, you will use a combination of an adjustment factor of
increasing a WPI rating by 40% and the adjustments for occupation and age under the 2005 PDRS.
For injuries that occur prior to January 1, 2005 and where the 1997 PDRS applies, you are directed to Rassp &
Herlick, California Workers’ Compensation Law, Ch. 7 (LexisNexis), for an explanation on how to apply the
1997 PDRS that is based on work restrictions rather than on impairment ratings under the AMA Guides 5th
Edition. For injuries occurring prior to 1/1/2005, the 2005 PDRS using the AMA Guides 5th Edition applies
pursuant to Labor Code § 4660(d) unless the injured employee was declared permanent and stationary prior to
1/1/2005, an evaluating or treating physician indicated the existence of permanent disability prior to 1/1/2005, or
a permanent disability benefits notice was required to have been sent prior to 1/1/2005.
This chapter also describes how to calculate a permanent disability rating for any date of injury on or after
January 1, 2005 or when the AMA Guides 5th Edition otherwise applies. However, there are functional
differences in how to calculate a permanent disability rating for injuries that occur on or after 1/1/2013. Since
there is no official separate 2013 PDRS at the time this guidebook went to print, you will have to use the 2005
PDRS in order to calculate a proper rating for injuries that occur on or after 1/1/2013. This is still true in 2021.
Therefore, you can use the 2005 PDRS, appended at the end of this guidebook, for all injuries occurring on or
after January 1, 2005.
As you will see, the formula for determining the permanent disability ratings for dates of injury on or after 1/1/13
simplifies the use of the Diminished Future Earning Capacity (DFEC) adjustments by reducing them from eight
adjustment factor ranks to one rank of 1.4. All other adjustments for age and occupation remain the same.
Labor Code § 4060,1, enacted in 2012, also mandated the Division of Workers’ Compensation (DWC)
Administrative Director to update the adjustments for age and occupation based on more recent empirical
evidence. The RAND Corporation Institute for Social Justice may be requested to conduct a more recent study
of loss of earnings due to work injuries focusing on the ages and occupations of injured worker populations in
order to determine if prior assumptions still apply. For example, the 2005 and 2013 PDRS assume the older the
worker on the date of injury the more loss of future earning capacity occurs and the more permanent disability
indemnity is payable. That may not be the case for younger workers who sustain serious injuries resulting in
significant permanent disability and how that disability affects future earnings.
Under SB 863, enacted in 2012, Labor Code § 4660.1 gives the Administrative Director discretion on whether
he or she issues new occupational and/or age modifiers for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013. The statute
simply says under subsection (e), the Administrative Director may adopt a new PDRS that restructures age and
occupation adjustments based on consistency, objectivity and uniformity with studies to be conducted through
the Commission on Health, Safety & Workers’ Compensation (CHSWC).
Empirically, for example, a farm laborer with a bad back should get a higher permanent disability rating than a
bank president with the same bad back. But in all of the prior permanent disability rating schedules (including
Page 2 of 3
§ 2.01 The Effects of Reform Legislation
more recent ones from 1988, 1997, 2005, and now 2013), there has been no description on how occupational
variants or age modifiers were established.
We do know that the occupational variants were derived by the Disability Evaluation Unit by using the federal
Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT). This document was been available for decades through the U.S.
Department of Labor and is still the bible used by vocational experts in social security disability claims.
However, the age modifiers were solely developed by the Disability Evaluation Unit.
In fact, some arguments have been made that the age modifier should be the other way around—where
younger injured workers get a higher permanent disability award than older injured workers because permanent
disability from an industrial injury has a greater economic impact on younger injured workers than on older
injured workers. Since the statutory language in Labor Code § 4660.1 is discretionary for the development of an
entirely new PDRS with new occupation and age modifiers, it remains to be seen whether the Administrative
Director will have political cover and empirical support to change these factors in a future permanent disability
rating schedule. As of the publication deadline for this guidebook, the administrative director has not proposed
an updated or revised permanent disability rating schedule despite legislation that mandates updates one every
five years.
As stated in Ch. 1 of this guidebook, for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, there are no separate DFEC
adjustment factors. Instead, as described below, all WPI ratings will be multiplied times a uniform “adjustment
factor” of 1.4 and then adjusted for occupation and age. In order to calculate a permanent disability rating for
injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, you must develop a working knowledge of how to rate injuries under the
2005 PDRS.
[2] SB 899
Labor Code § 4660(b)(1), amended on April 19, 2004, provides: “For the purposes of this section, the ‘nature of
the physical injury or disfigurement’ shall incorporate the descriptions and measurements of physical
impairments and the corresponding percentages of impairments published in the American Medical Association
(AMA) Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (5th Edition).”
Under SB 899, the 2005 PDRS was supposed to have been revised every five years using new and updated
wage loss data in order to calculate the actual WPI to proportional wage losses for each part of body injured.
For political reasons, this process never occurred, and the end of 2010 came and went without a new PDRS
based on updated data.
However, in late 2008, the Administrative Director proposed new regulations that included a revised permanent
disability rating schedule that would have been effective for injuries occurring on or after either 1/1/2009 or
7/1/2009. These regulations were never submitted by the Administrative Director to the Office of Administrative
Law for approval by that body and, therefore, were never adopted. Instead, the 2005 PDRS is still in full force
and effect for injuries that occur on or after 1/1/2005, with the provisions of Labor Code § 4660(d) and case law
still in effect for injuries occurring prior to 1/1/2005.
The interesting fact about the proposed but not adopted “2009 PDRS” is that the FEC adjustments were based
upon more current empirical data of injured workers’ loss of future earnings. Those wage loss data were linked
for the first time to impairment ratings under the AMA Guides 5th Edition, while the wage loss data for the 2005
PDRS were based upon ratings from the 1988 PDRS. The FEC adjustments were increased and some parts of
body injured adjustments were “re-stacked” from the assigned FEC rankings from the 2005 PDRS, which would
have resulted in a net increase of permanent disability payments of 16% above those awarded under the 2005
PDRS. See the discussion of the First District Court of Appeal decision in Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. [(2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624 (“Ogilvie III”)] in Ch. 7 of
this guidebook.
Even though the “2009 PDRS” was not adopted by the Administrative Director, the data that led to the proposal
for the “2009 PDRS” are important for counsel to be aware of since the WCAB is allowing evidence to rebut a
permanent disability rating under the 2005 PDRS with a focus on either the impairment rating from the AMA
Guides 5th Edition or on the assigned FEC Ranking for diminished future earning capacity or on both the
impairment rating and the FEC adjustment. See Ch. 7 of this guidebook for a detailed description of how ratings
under the 2005 PDRS may be rebutted.
Page 3 of 3
§ 2.01 The Effects of Reform Legislation
For the purpose of how to rate an impairment to permanent disability, reference will be made throughout this
guidebook to “FEC adjustments” or “DFEC adjustments,” which mean the same thing—an injured worker’s
diminished future earning capacity adjustment. In order to understand how to develop the record on using or
rebutting the 2005 PDRS, it is first necessary for you to learn how to rate cases using the 2005 PDRS.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 2.02
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 2
Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
§ 2.02 Overview of Permanent Disability Rating Schedules
[1] Organization of 2005 PDRS
The 2005 PDRS is organized into eight sections:
SECTION 1: Introduction and Instructions, pages 1-1 through 1-16.
SECTION 2: Impairment Number/Earning Capacity Adjustment, pages 2-1 through 2-7. This section will
not be used for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013. Instead, a uniform multiplier of 1.4 will be used.
SECTION 3: Occupations and Group Numbers, pages 3-1 through 3-37.
SECTION 4: Occupational Variants, pages 4-1 through 4-9.
SECTION 5: Occupational Adjustment, pages 5-1 through 5-3.
SECTION 6: Age Adjustment, pages 6-1 through 6-5.
SECTION 7: Examples, pages 7-1 through 7-4.
SECTION 8: Combined Values Chart, pages 8-1 through 8-4.
[2] Comparison to 1997 Rating Schedule
In order to understand the 2005 PDRS using the AMA Guides, it is important to recall how the 1997 Rating
Schedule works.
The 1997 PDRS is based upon objective medical findings, subjective complaints, and work restrictions, when
the applicant is permanent and stationary. That percentage is then adjusted for age and occupation and
expressed as a percentage of loss of ability to compete in the open labor market. The doctor provided the
residuals of the industrial injury by expressing the injured employee’s subjective complaints, objective findings,
and work restrictions. The adjustment for age and occupation were mathematical constants, fixed across the
same or similar injuries.
EXAMPLE:
A 50% standard spine injury would adjust as much as 17% up or down depending upon the applicant’s
age being between 21 and 62 or older on the date of injury. The occupational variant was also a
mathematical constant intended to produce consistency of ratings for the same occupation for different
injuries. The only legal evidentiary debate for the mathematical constants for age and occupational
adjustments is the applicant’s occupational variant because everything else was fixed by each doctor’s
conclusions and the applicant’s age on the date of injury.
[3] Basic Components of 2005 PDRS
The 2005 PDRS has four separate components:
1. Residuals of the industrial injury expressed in whole person impairments (abbreviated hereinafter as
“WPI”) using the AMA Guides. The WPI is determined exclusively by medical evidence from a physician.
Page 2 of 6
§ 2.02 Overview of Permanent Disability Rating Schedules
NOTE:
Physicians no longer determine permanent disability; rather, they only determine permanent
impairments.
2. Adjustment for the applicant’s loss of future earning capacity based upon the same or similar injuries
and the data from RAND concerning loss of earnings. This will be expressed as a mathematical constant
depending upon the region or part of body injured, referred to as the FEC adjustment.
3. Adjustment for the applicant’s age on the date of injury.
4. Adjustment for the applicant’s occupation.
The adjustments for loss of future earning capacity, occupation, and age are mathematical constants. We leave
the development of these mathematical constants to the researchers and the AD’s office (and hopefully not to
the politicians). What is left for practitioners to argue about besides the applicant’s occupation are the AMA
Guides and the doctors’ use, abuse, or neglect of the Guides.
There may be a further argument about the admissibility of extrinsic evidence on the issue of the total loss of
future earning capacity when an employee is severely injured but whose WPI is less than 100% (a person is
dead, totally dependent on attendant care, or comatose at 100% WPI). Built into the whole person impairment
scale of 0% to 100% is the notion that a person who is 100% impaired is unable to engage in any kind of
activities of daily living.
Work is considered a complex task and is not, by definition, an “activity of daily living” as stated in AMA Guides
Chapter 1 [see discussion in this guidebook at Ch. 3, § 3.02]. There is a question regarding at what point in the
0% to 100% whole person impairment scale does a person become so impaired that he or she suffers a total
loss of future earning capacity due to that impairment? Hint: for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, a WPI
rating of 72% results in a default of 100% permanent total disability, before apportionment. The use of
vocational experts, economists, and Social Security disability awards still need to be resolved by the WCAB
and appellate courts on a case-by-case basis.
The authors of the AMA Guides did not contemplate each state’s nuances on the use of the Guides to
determine disability. The California concept of “loss of future earning capacity” in Labor Code § 4660 is not
covered in the AMA Guides. The AD’s adoption of the 2005 PDRS is supposed to close the gap between the
AMA Guides method of determining impairments and the mandate for their use to determine permanent
disability pursuant to California law.
Counsel is urged to become familiar with the text descriptions of how the 2005 PDRS is used. Much of the
information in the PDRS introduction is useful to quote to medical-legal physicians during depositions or in
advocacy letters to them. For example, the 2005 PDRS states on Page 1-2 that a “permanent disability rating
can range from 0% to 100%. Zero percent signifies no reduction of earning capacity, while 100% represents
permanent total disability. A rating between 0% and 100% represents permanent partial disability. Permanent
total disability represents a level of disability at which an employee has sustained a total loss of earning
capacity. Some impairments are conclusively presumed to be totally disabling (Labor Code § 4662).”
Remember, the PDRS and its instructions are a regulation, mandated by Labor Code § 4660 for the 2005
PDRS and Labor Code § 4660.1 for the 2013 PDRS which have the same instructions except for the 1,4
adjustment factor for 2013 and later injuries. Counsel can quote this language in a physician advocacy letter or
raise it during a physician’s deposition.
The adjustments for occupation and age were not changed under the 2005 PDRS. The permanent disability
rating schedule requires that the treating or evaluating doctor only evaluate the residuals of an injury based
upon the injured worker’s permanent impairment. An impairment is the loss or loss of use of a body’s organ,
part, or function. Doctors no longer evaluate permanent disability. They only determine whole person
impairment (WPI) based upon the AMA Guides using objective standards that are a result of medical
consensus. The Disability Evaluation Unit of the DWC/WCAB, a judge, or the parties determine permanent
disability after a doctor determines whole person impairments (WPI). A physician may opine that an industrial
Page 3 of 6
§ 2.02 Overview of Permanent Disability Rating Schedules
injury is so severe that the person is no longer able to work, but there has to be a solid medical reason given for
that conclusion.
Once the doctor has determined the residuals of an injury for each body part affected in terms of WPI, then
each body part WPI is adjusted to determine permanent disability, which is a multiple-step process [see [4],
below]. Note that under the AMA Guides, the combined WPI for an upper extremity cannot exceed a 60% WPI
standard, and the combined WPI for each lower extremity cannot exceed a 40% WPI standard [see AMA
Guides Chapter 2 discussed in this guidebook at Ch. 3, § 3.03].
Once a permanent and stationary report is received from a treating or evaluating physician, it is strongly
recommended that the report be carefully scrutinized for compliance with the AMA Guides. Use Section 2.6 of
the AMA Guides, Labor Code § 4628, and Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 8, Section 10682 as guidelines for
reviewing a medical report for substantiality as evidence of permanent impairment. For example, in a spinal
injury case, if the employee injured his or her neck, mid back, and lower back the physician must evaluate each
of the three involved sub-regions of the spine separately and indicate separate whole person impairment
ratings for each sub-region. Then the separate whole person impairments are combined using the Combined
Values Chart on Page 604 of the AMA Guides (or Pages 8-2 to 8-4 of the 2005 schedule [see AMA Guides
Chapter 15, discussed in this guidebook at Ch. 3, § 3.15].
NOTE:
The Combined Values Chart in the 2005 PDRS are the same as the one on page 604 of the AMA
Guides and is based upon the same mathematical formula. Practitioners are advised to use the
combined values chart at the end of the 2005 PDRS rather than the one in the AMA Guides since there
are errors in the latter chart. This guidebook has the full 2005 PDRS and money charts in Appendices
A and C.
In addition, every physician has to indicate apportionment of permanent disability in any final report when the
injured worker’s medical condition becomes permanent and stationary. Many physicians confuse the legal
concept of apportionment mandated under Labor Code § 4663 and apportionment as that term is used in the
AMA Guides. Counsel should be aware that Labor Code § 4663 mandates a physician comment on
apportionment of permanent disability to causation and not apportionment of WPI ratings. This is a significant
common mistake we see in medical-legal reports and counsel should be prepared to address this issue
frequently. Discussion of apportionment of permanent disability is discussed elsewhere in this guidebook. See,
e.g., Ch. 6 of this guidebook.
[4] Multiple-Step Process for Determining Permanent Disability for Injuries Between 2005 and 12/31/12
Permanent disability for each industrially injured body part or system is determined as follows:
• STEP ONE: The physician determines the whole person impairment rating for each part of body injured in
an industrial injury. The physician must use the descriptions and measurements in the AMA Guides 5th
Edition and cannot deviate from the chapters, tables, and methods.
• STEP TWO: Under Section 2 of the 2005 PDRS, the first step is to adjust the whole person impairment
based upon that body part’s loss of future earning capacity (FEC) adjustment. There are eight
assigned FEC adjustments in the permanent disability schedule based upon the RAND study. For
example, a psychiatric WPI is adjusted by the FEC for psychiatric injuries by a factor of 1.4. In other
words, the WPI standard is increased by 40%. In contrast, loss of gripping power results in a WPI
increased by 23%, a lumbar or cervical spine injury is increased by 27%. Use Table B in Section 1 of
the schedule to find each body part’s FEC Rank from one to eight and use Table A for the FEC
Adjustment Factor (see illustrations below).
PRACTICE TIP:
Page 4 of 6
§ 2.02 Overview of Permanent Disability Rating Schedules
A short cut is to use the FEC table on pages 2-6 and 2-7 with the FEC Ranks listed for each body part
on pages 2-2 through 2-5.
NOTE:
So a partial rating string looks like this:
15.01.01.00 − 10 − [5] 14 − occupation − age = permanent disability rating
• STEP THREE: Once the WPI for each injured body part is adjusted for loss of future earning capacity
then each body part is adjusted for occupation as was calculated under the 1997 Rating Schedule. The
2005 PDRS contains additional occupational groups that were not included in the 1997 Rating
Schedule. These additional occupational groups reflect changes in the labor force since 1997. For
adjustment for occupational group, refer to Section 5 of the 2005 PDRS, pages 5-1 through 5-3 (see
example below).
NOTE:
The following illustration is just one example or page from Section 5 of the 2005 PDRS. See Appendix
A of this guidebook for the full version of Section 5 of the 2005 PDRS.
• STEP FOUR: The next step is to adjust each body part for the injured worker’s age as of the date of
injury, using the same method as under the 1997 Rating Schedule. Refer to Section 6 of the 2005
PDRS, pages 6-1 through 6-5 (see example below).
NOTE:
The following illustration is just one example or page from Section 6 of the 2005 PDRS. See Appendix
A of this guidebook for the full version of Section 6 of the 2005 PDRS.
• STEP FIVE: The final step is to combine permanent disability for different body parts using the formula a
+ b(1.0 − a). This  formula is similar to the old Multiple Disabilities Table (MDT), but does not adjust the
same way. The variables a and b are decimal equivalents of the permanent disability percentages. Use
Section 8, pages 8-1 through 8-4 of the 2005 PDRS to combine permanent disability using the highest
two ratings first and then combine with the next highest rating and so on (see example below).
NOTE:
The following illustration is just one example or page from Section 8 of the 2005 PDRS. See Appendix
A of this guidebook for the full version of Section 8 of the 2005 PDRS.
If there is apportionment then the final permanent disability after apportionment is determined after adjustment
for FEC, occupation, and  age as was performed under the 1997 Rating Schedule. Apportionment is still a legal
conclusion to be determined by the treating and evaluating physicians and ultimately a workers’ compensation
judge [see Labor Code §§ 4663(b), 4663(c), 4664(a), 4664(b); Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal. Comp.
Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), writ den. sub nom. Escobedo v. W.C.A.B. (Marshalls) (2005) 70
Cal. Comp. Cases 604]. For an extensive discussion of the Escobedo case, see Chapter 6 of this Guidebook. If
Page 5 of 6
§ 2.02 Overview of Permanent Disability Rating Schedules
you practice workers’ compensation law in California, you need to read Escobedo at least once a year as you
should for many of our landmark cases.
The permanent disability ratings will have multiple numeric digits that signify information for interested parties:
“xx.xx.xx.xx.” The first two digits refer to the chapter number in the AMA Guides. Further digits determine more
details of the impairment. For example, whether the WPI was determined by a Diagnosis Related Estimate
(DRE) or Range of Motion (ROM) method is coded. The appropriate codes to use can be found in the 2005
PDRS based upon the part of body injured and the AMA Guides chapter the doctor refers to in determining WPI
for that body part. See Section 2 of the 2005 PDRS.
In this guidebook at Ch. 5, you’ll find some examples of the use of the 2005 PDRS with the AMA Guides.
The 2005 PDRS is reprinted in full in Appendix A of this guidebook.
[5] Updated Rand Study
In 2013, the Rand Corporation released the results of its on-going study of the use of the AMA Guides in the
California workers’ compensation system as the framework of the determination of permanent disability utilizing
WPI ratings as the first variable. The main purpose of the study was to determine the existence and extent of
any correlation between WPI ratings from industrial injuries and loss of income due to loss of earning capacity
from an industrial injury for a three-year period post injury.
The study, “American Medical Association Impairment Ratings and Earnings Losses Due to Disability,” by Seth
A. Seabury, PhD, Frank Neuhauser, MPP, and Teryl Nuckols, MD, MSHS, is published in the Journal of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Vol. 55. No. 3, pp. 286–291 (March 2013).
The authors offer various conclusions and insights, including most notably:
• AMA Guides-based impairment ratings do indeed have a significant association with earnings losses as a
result of disability in that claimants with higher impairment ratings had higher earnings losses due to
their inability to work; thus, the AMA Guides is an effective tool for measuring disability and not just
severity of impairment; in fact, the authors say the AMA Guides Fifth being used today in California is a
more accurate and consistent rating tool than what was previously used in that state’s system
• A major concern, however, is that there are differences across body regions in the association between
impairment ratings and earnings losses, suggesting that disability varies across body regions; in other
words, a claimant receiving an AMA Guides rating for a spine injury might be underpaid in workers’
comp benefits in comparison to someone with a knee injury
• Another concern is that “the level of impairment ratings did not reflect the level of earnings loss” because
even very low impairment ratings indicated substantial earnings losses; thus, without consideration of
other factors, an impairment rating by itself is not an adequate measure of the economic consequence
of a disabling injury
• Earnings losses may also differ across other individual characteristics, such as age or occupation, but
more studies are needed in this regard
• The study did not examine the impact of disability on the quality of life for the claimants
• The average ratings under the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Editions are similar, with the one exception being
spine impairments, which is lower under the Sixth Edition (see above regarding the authors’ findings of
already low ratings for spine impairments in relation to earnings losses)
The authors of this study did not point out any data for heart and cardiovascular injuries with respect to
proportionate wage loss. It should be noted that the Six Edition of the Guides also lowers ratings for heart
related impairments compared to those in the Fifth Edition. In addition, the study did not compare WPI ratings
to proportional wage loss ratios based on strict WPI ratings from the AMA Guides 5th Edition as opposed to
using alternative WPI ratings derived pursuant to case law. The author of this guidebook decided to keep this
section on the 2008 wage loss study because data since then has been consistent with respect to wage loss
ratios to part of body injured. The data is old but time tested, and it is hoped that ten more years of data will
provide very strong empirical evidence of the correlation between work injuries and long-term wage loss.
Page 6 of 6
§ 2.02 Overview of Permanent Disability Rating Schedules
The three-year loss of earnings period is a moving target from a research standpoint and depends on the
definition of “disability onset.” The term “disability onset” is not well defined in the study and can affect the
validity of the study authors’ conclusions. Is the “disability onset” date the date of injury or is it the first date the
injured worker misses time from work due to the industrial injury, or is it the date on which the injured worker’s
medical condition has stabilized and he or she suffers from permanent partial disability?
In previous studies, including the RAND report of December 2003, the same authors used the date of injury as
the start date for the three-year period, but in this study, the authors used the “date of onset” as the date of
injury defined by the authors as “the date the individual first goes to the doctor or misses work due to the
condition and realizes (or a physician determines) it was work related. The quarter of injury and quarter of
disability onset are the same in most cases, even if the exact dates differ.” This definition creates a data bias
since the authors did not compare impairment to proportional wage loss from specific injuries to those from
cumulative trauma injuries.
One of this author’s undergraduate degrees is in research design. It is baffling to someone who has dedicated
his adult life to having a leadership position with a non-profit medical research institute that RAND did not study
earnings loss as of the date each participant in the study was first declared permanent and stationary instead of
his or her date of injury. It reminds me of what my statistics professor said on the first day of class: “There are
five kinds of lies: fibs, excuses, lies, damn lies, and statistics.” It is quite irritating when studies are designed
with political expediencies in mind.
[6] Calculating Permanent Disability for Injuries On or After 1/1/2013
• STEP ONE: The physician determines the whole person impairment rating for each part of body injured in
an industrial injury. The physician must use the descriptions chapters, tables and methods.
• STEP TWO: You multiply each separate WPI rating times 1.4. So a partial rating string looks like this:
15.01.01.00 − 10 − [10 × 1.4] 14 − occupation − age − permanent disability
• STEP THREE: Adjust the rating for the injured worker’s occupation on the date of injury. For adjustment
for occupational group, refer to Section 5 of the 2005 PDRS, pages 5-1 through 5-3
• STEP FOUR: The next step is to adjust each body part for the injured worker’s age as of the date of
injury. Refer to Section 6 of the 2005 PDRS, pages 6-1 through 6-5.
• STEP FIVE: The final step is to combine permanent disability for different body parts using the formula a
+ b(1.0 − a). This formula is similar to the old Multiple Disabilities Table (MDT), but does not adjust the
same way. The variables a and b are decimal equivalents of the permanent disability percentages. Use
Section 8, pages 8-1 through 8-4 of the 2005 PDRS to combine permanent disability using the highest
two ratings first and then combine with the next highest rating and so on (see example below).
PRACTICE POINT:
The rating string for injuries occurring under the 2005 PDRS looks like this:
xx.xx.xx.xx. − WPI − [DFEC RANK] rating − occupation − age = permanent disability
The rating string for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 looks like this:
xx.xx.xx.xx. − WPI − [WPI × 1.4] rating − occupation − age = permanent disability
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 2.03
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 2
Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
§ 2.03 Application of AMA Guides to California Workers’ Compensation
Cases
Rules that are unique to the application of the AMA Guides to California workers’ compensation cases were
adopted out of necessity in order to correctly apply the loss of future earning capacity adjustments to different parts
of the body injured within a region or sub-region:

RULE #1: Make sure the injured worker is declared to have reached maximum medical improvement or
permanent and stationary. A physician cannot evaluate an injured worker until his or her activities of daily
living have stabilized or will not change in the next year with or without further treatment.
RULE #2: Make sure each physician properly uses the AMA Guides by citing the correct chapter, method,
and table(s) used in calculating WPI for a body part or body functional loss. When in doubt, think loss of
range of motion, sensory, and motor deficits and how those items are measured for a given region or body
function. The physician must start with a “strict” WPI rating if one exists when the Applicant reaches
maximum medical improvement. Impairment ratings are based on one of the following three factors:
anatomic, diagnosis based, or functional loss.
RULE #3: If the physician uses the diagnosis related or based estimates or evaluations, make sure the
doctor justifies within a DRE or DBE range where a given case exists (on the high, middle, or low end within
a range).
RULE #4: Most physicians write “the patient has a total WPI of 18%” involving multiple body parts injured.
This may not be a valid conclusion since you need to know the WPI ratings for each body part injured since
many are rated for permanent disability separately even if the parts are within the same region of the body.
For an example of how California uses the AMA Guides differently than the AMA Guides state it should be used,
note that AMA Guides Chapter 17 requires that lower extremity ratings be combined using the Combined Values
Chart on page 604 before lower extremity injuries to more than one sub-region (like a right ankle and right knee) are
converted to WPI. Similarly, AMA Guides Chapter 16 requires combining ratings for upper extremity injuries using
upper extremity ratings within each side (like a right hand, right elbow, and right shoulder) before converting to WPI.
In contrast, the California 2005 PDRS requires each body part to be rated separately, converted to WPI, converted
to permanent disability by adjusting for FEC, occupation, and age, and then combined with the other body parts
within the same region and with other injuries in other regions. So for a lower extremity injury to the right ankle and
right knee, each body part is rated separately to a lower extremity rating, converted to WPI, adjusted for FEC,
occupation, and age, and then combined using the combined values chart in the 2005 PDRS on pages 8-1 through
8-4.
Page 2 of 3
§ 2.03 Application of AMA Guides to California Workers’ Compensation Cases
NOTE:
The WPI for each lower extremity cannot exceed a 40% standard WPI rating; i.e. an amputated leg is a 40%
WPI. The same applies for upper extremities—the WPI rating for each upper extremity cannot exceed 60%
WPI.
CAUTION:
The combined values chart in the AMA Guides starting on page 604 contains some errors. Use the
combined values chart in the 2005 PDRS instead. The combined values chart is a mathematical formula a +
b(1 − a) where a and b are the numerical decimal percentage ratings.
With respect to an upper extremity injury to the right hand, right elbow, and right shoulder, each sub-region of the
upper extremity has a separate FEC adjustment, and each upper extremity part must be rated separately. You need
to convert each part to an upper extremity rating, convert to WPI, calculate the permanent disability for each part by
adjusting the corresponding FEC, occupation, and age, and then combine using the combined values chart in the
2005 PDRS.
In fact, the 2005 PDRS has explicit instructions, and you should always refresh your memory on some of the more
important rules of application of how to rate cases under the schedule. For example, the term adjusted means WPI
is adjusted for DFEC, age, and occupation. See the 2005 PDRS, pages 1-10 through page 1-11.
Multiple impairments of hand or foot are combined using AMA Guides protocols, converted to WPI, then adjusted
for DFEC, age, and occupation, and then combined with PD ratings of the same extremity. Multiple impairments
involving a single part of an extremity (such as shoulder instability and ROM) are combined at the upper extremity
level, then converted to WPI and adjusted before being combined with other parts of the same extremity.
The 2005 PDRS on page 1-11 also states: “Some impairments of the same body part may not be combined
because of duplication.” We are not sure what the authors of this sentence meant or how they intended for it to
apply in these cases. Over the last fourteen fifteen years that the 2005 PDRS has been applied to our cases, there
is no actual case law that interprets the application of this sentence in a rating dispute. However, the Combined
Values Chart severely compresses multiple disabilities as the percentages increase. For example, a 99% adjusted
permanent disability rating does not become 100% permanent total disability unless a separate rating is 50%
permanent disability or higher.
Remember, Labor Code § 4662 refers to presumptive 100% permanent total disabilities. Labor Code § 4660
mandates the use of the AMA Guides and defines permanent disability as a loss of future earning capacity. This
applies to injuries prior to 1/1/13. For injuries on or after 1/1/13, there is no statutory definition of permanent
disability as the legislature removed “loss of future earning capacity” from the statute. However, the 2005
permanent disability rating schedule (PDRS) states on page 1-2: “A permanent disability rating can range from 0%
to 100%. Zero percent signifies no reduction of earning capacity, while 100% represents permanent total disability.
A rating between 0% and 100% represents permanent partial disability. Permanent total disability represents a level
of disability at which an employee has sustained a total loss of earning capacity. Some impairments are
conclusively presumed to be totally disabling. (Labor Code Section 4662).”
Most of the case law that has been developed since 1/1/13 revolve around proving 100% permanent total disability
pursuant to Labor Code § 4662(b) “based on the fact.” See Ch. 8 of this Guidebook for a discussion of the
Fitzpatrick case.
Page 3 of 3
§ 2.03 Application of AMA Guides to California Workers’ Compensation Cases
The instructions in the 2005 PDRS also instruct us that impairments with disability numbers in the 16.01 and 17.01
series are converted to WPI and adjusted before being combined with any other impairment of the same extremity.
Impairments of an individual extremity are adjusted and combined at the WPI level with other impairments of the
same extremity before being combined with impairments of other body parts. For example, left knee and left ankle
would be combined before further combination with PD for the opposite leg or back.
So if you have a case involving two industrially injured knees, you rate each knee separately for PD, then combine.
Some other rules of the road directly from the 2005 PDRS are as follows: “The composite rating for an extremity
after adjustment cannot exceed the amputation value (60% WPI for arm, 40% WPI for leg), adjusted for DFEC,
occupation and age. The occupational variant used to rate an entire extremity shall be the highest variant of the
involved individual impairments.”
Except as specified on page 1-11 of the 2005 PDRS, when combining three or more ratings on the same scale (UE,
LE, or WPI) into a single rating, combine the two largest ratings first, rounding the result to the nearest whole
percent. Then combine that result with the next larger rating, and so on, until all ratings are combined. Each
successive calculation result must be rounded before performing the next. See the 2005 PDRS, page 1-10.
Also, remember that the combined WPI for one upper extremity cannot exceed a 60% WPI standard (an amputated
arm is a 60% WPI standard rating). Even if the FEC adjustment is the same for injured body parts within a region,
you should rate each body part separately, convert to WPI, adjust for FEC, occupation, and age, and then combine.
The same rule applies to bilateral upper or lower extremity injuries. Each leg is 40% of the whole person
(amputation of both legs is a 64% WPI), and each arm is 60% of the whole person (amputation of both arms is a
84% WPI, the hand is 90% of the upper extremity, the thumb is 40% of the hand and so on).
Thus, a right wrist must be rated separately from a left shoulder. Once the permanent disability rating for each body
part is calculated, you then combine the rating for the right wrist with the rating for the left shoulder and with any
other body part injured in the order of the highest PD ratings with the next highest in accordance with the
instructions in the 2005 PDRS.
The applicant will end up with one overall PD rating for all parts of the body injured, just like under the 1997 Rating
Schedule, but now we use a different method of combining PD for different body parts injured. The multiple
disabilities table no longer exists under the 2005 PDRS.
In spinal injury cases [see AMA Guides Chapter 15], the spine is divided into sub-regions, and each sub-region is
rated separately for WPI (like a cervical and lumbar spine), then combined using the combined values charts on
pages 8-1 through 8-4 of the 2005 PDRS and then adjusted for FEC, occupation, and age.
Evaluating and treating physicians often fail to rate separate sub-regions of the spine in their reports, which requires
revision and delays resolution of claims. If an injury involves the neck and lumbar spine, the physician must indicate
a WPI rating for each separately. The same rule applies even if the two sub-regions of the spine are adjacent, as in
an injury to both the lumbar and thoracic spine areas.
All of the rules mentioned in this section are reiterations of the instructions in the 2005 PDRS. These instructions
still apply to injuries that occur on or after 1/1/2013 unless and until the Administrative Director adopts a new PDRS
that is independent from the 2005 PDRS. However, under Labor Code § 4660.1(e), adjustments for occupation and
age are to be based on those modifiers in the 2005 PDRS until a new PDRS may be adopted by the Administrative
Director.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 2.04
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 2
Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
§ 2.04 Compliance of Medical Reports With Requirements of AMA Guides
Too often medical reports written by treating and evaluating physicians fail to comply with the requirements of the
AMA Guides, such as when to use the DRE method or the ROM method of rating WPI for spinal injuries. In these
types of cases, if the physician fails to properly use the correct method of evaluating WPI for a spinal injury, then
the Disability Evaluation Unit and the WCJs are instructed to reject the report as not substantial evidence.
NOTE:
Pay close attention to the discussion of AMA Guides Chapter 15, which discussion can be found in this
guidebook at Ch. 3, § 3.15, to determine when the diagnosis related estimate (DRE) method is to be used
and when the range of motion (ROM) method is to be used in a given case. Fifteen years after adoption of
the AMA Guides 5th Edition, there is still significant litigation over whether the DRE or ROM method applies
in a given case. Always remember that the authors and editors of the AMA Guides did not consider the
existence of cumulative trauma injuries when they wrote the book. Whenever the word “injury” is used, the
context of the use of the word means a specific traumatic event and nothing more.
From a medical evidentiary standpoint, it is important to remember the AD’s language adopted as part of the 2005
PDRS at page 1-4:
“If an impairment based on an objective medical condition is not addressed by the AMA Guides, physicians
should use clinical judgment, comparing measurable impairment resulting from the unlisted objective medical
condition to measurable impairment resulting from similar objective medical conditions with similar impairment
of function in performing activities of daily living. (AMA Guides, page 11.)”
For example, AMA Guides Chapter 17 does not mention plantar fasciitis of the foot, which is a frequent industrial
injury for employees who perform prolonged standing and walking work activities. Such a condition can severely
affect one’s activities of daily living and work. Orthopedic surgeons will use range of motion, sensory, and motor
deficit measurements to justify impairments for ankle and foot disorders.
Similarly, employees who develop fibromyalgia from an industrial injury are especially affected by the new
requirement that there must be an “objective medical condition.” However, no one defines “objective medical
condition” in the AMA Guides or in the 2005 PDRS. Some rheumatologists are using AMA Guides Chapter 13
(arousal, sleep disorders, brain injuries) in order to define an “objective medical condition”  recognized by the
Guides. Other rheumatologists are indicating that the condition exists, but it is not included in the AMA Guides and
should be evaluated under the DSM-IV TR or DSM-5 as a mental disorder such as somatic related disorders (DSM-
5) or somatoform disorder (DSM-IV TR).
See § 2.07, below, for model joint AME and panel QME letters and medical-legal reporting in general.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 2 of 2
§ 2.04 Compliance of Medical Reports With Requirements of AMA Guides
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 2.05
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 2
Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
§ 2.05 Pain Adjustments
Physicians have discretion to increase a body part’s WPI by up to 3% for pain beyond that which would be
expected from the medical condition under AMA Guides Chapter 18, and doctors are encouraged by the 2005
PDRS to use the pain related impairment assessment on page 575 of the AMA Guides. If a physician increases a
WPI by up to 3% due to a pain factor, then that amount is added to the WPI rating before adjustment for loss of
future earning capacity, age, and occupation.
Pain adjustments can occur only if the physician believes the employee’s activities of daily living are severely
burdened by the injury beyond that amount predicted by the standard permanent impairment rating under the AMA
Guides applicable chapter and part of body injured [see 2005 PDRS, page 1-12].
SB 863 introduces a new element in the up to 3% pain related impairment add-on that is permitted in the 2005
PDRS and Chapter 18 of the AMA Guides. New Labor Code §§ 4660.1(c)(1) and (2) prohibit increasing whole
person impairment ratings for sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction and psychiatric injuries that are compensable
consequences of a physical injury occurring on or after 1/1/2013. The employer still must provide medical treatment
for these conditions if they occur secondary to a physical injury but the WPI rating for the physical injury cannot be
increased for sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction or psychiatric conditions. An injured worker’s entitlement to
treatment and temporary total disability benefits due to any of these conditions are not affected by this legislation.
Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA Guides list the various ADLs (activities of daily living) that a physician must assess
in order to determine a WPI rating for each impairment and whether an additional up to 3% WPI can be added to
that rating for pain related impairment that causes a greater than expected effect on the ADLs. Two ADLs
mentioned in Table 1-2 include restorative sleep and sexual functioning.
The question raised by SB 863 is whether Labor Code § 4660.1(c) statutorily excludes up to 3% WPI pain related
impairment ratings for sleep disorders and sexual dysfunction in addition for these impairments as stand-alone WPI
ratings under the AMA Guides if they occur as a compensable consequence of a physical injury. Case law on this
issue will surely develop. A person cannot have a pain related impairment of up to 3% WPI if there is no underlying
ratable impairment. See Section 3, page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS. As of the publication deadline for this edition of
this guidebook, no case law exists that resolves this issue. It can be safely assumed that under Labor Code
§ 4660.1(c), there cannot be a stand-alone WPI impairment rating for sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction, or
psychiatric conditions that are compensable consequences of a physical injury unless the injury is a result of a
violent act. It appears so far that sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction, and psychiatric conditions can still be part of a
pain-related impairment increase of up to 3% WPI based on page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 2.06
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 2
Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
[1] Generally
Industrial injuries that result in psychiatric disabilities have always been problematic in the California workers’
compensation system. The 1997 Rating Schedule changed the protocols for rating permanent psychiatric
disabilities to require each physician to evaluate a person’s psychiatric condition along eight work function
impairments that were largely borrowed from those that have been used to determine eligibility for Social
Security disability benefits. For a complete discussion and description of work function and psychiatric
disorders, see Ch. 9 of this guidebook.
In the current edition of this guidebook, Ch. 9 describes psychiatric injuries, how mental disorders are
determined under the DSM-5, how permanent disability is rated and alternative rating methods for psychiatric
impairment. In addition, a summary of relevant case law that has developed over the years on psychiatric cases
is included in the chapter so that counsel can refer to all relevant information in a psyche case in one section in
this guidebook. In fact, 40 separate references to psychiatric injuries in previous editions of this guidebook have
been consolidated into one chapter for easy reference.
The 2005 PDRS effective 1/1/2005 changes that approach radically. However, the 2005 PDRS and the SB 899
legislation do not change any of the fundamental requirements for the compensability of a psychiatric industrial
injury. As described below, SB 863 in 2012 did change the requirements for compensability of a psychiatric
condition that is caused by a physical industrial injury. The requirements of Labor Code § 3208.3 must still be
met in order for a psychiatric injury to be compensable for injuries occurring on or before 1/1/2013. There has to
be six months of employment in order for a psychiatric condition to be considered industrially related, unless
there is a sudden and extraordinary event of employment [Labor Code § 3208.3(d)]. The six months of
employment requirement applies in all psychiatric claims [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. WCAB (Garcia) (2003) 112
Cal. App. 4th 1435, 5 Cal. Rptr. 3d 822, 68 Cal. Comp. Cases 1575].
“In order to establish that a psychiatric injury is compensable, an employee shall demonstrate by a
preponderance of the evidence that actual events of employment were predominant as to all causes combined
of the psychiatric injury” [Labor Code § 3208.3(b)(1)]. The determination of whether an alleged psychiatric injury
involves actual events of employment is a question of fact and law, and the question of whether those events
were the predominant cause of the psychiatric injury is a question regarding medical evidence [Rolda v. Pitney
Bowes, Inc. (2001) 66 Cal. Comp. Cases 241 (Appeals Board en banc opinion)].
Under the Rolda analysis, the WCJ determines whether there were actual events of employment as a legal
question, the physician determines the causation of the psychiatric injury as a medical question, the WCJ then
determines whether the actual events were personnel actions, and, if so, whether they were lawful,
nondiscriminatory and in good faith, and the physician decides as a medical question whether the personnel
actions substantially caused (35–40%) the psychiatric condition. Finally, the physician must offer a medical
opinion as to what percentage of the psychiatric condition is caused by personnel actions.
The law still distinguishes between physical-mental, mental-mental, and mental-physical industrial injuries. The
analysis of compensability of a psychiatric injury is the same for all types of psychiatric claims. The
“predominant cause” threshold of compensability standard applies in all types of psychiatric cases, even ones
that arise as a result of a physical injury [Lockheed Martin v. W.C.A.B. (McCullough) (2002) 96 Cal. App. 4th
1237, 117 Cal. Rptr. 2d 865, 67 Cal. Comp. Cases 245].
Page 2 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
The determination of compensability of any industrial injury, including psychiatric injury, is independent of the
2004 legislation on apportionment of permanent disability to causation [see Labor Code §§ 3600, 3208,
3208.3]. The apportionment of permanent disability to causation mandated in Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664
are irrelevant to the threshold issue of causation of an injury arising out of employment and in the course and
scope of employment [Reyes v. Fremont Compensation Ins. Co. (Hart Plastering) (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases
223 (Appeals Board significant panel decision)].
In 2012, SB 863 changes the compensability of psychiatric injuries that result from physical industrial injuries.
Labor Code § 4660.1(c) mandates that sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction and psychiatric disorders caused by
a physical injury cannot cause an increase in a WPI rating. The employer must still provide treatment and
temporary total disability benefit for these disorders but no increase in WPI ratings can occur. The exception is
if a psychiatric disorder is caused by a violent act, or direct exposure to significant violent act (referencing Labor
Code § 3208.3) or a catastrophic injury, including but not limited to, loss of a limb, paralysis, severe burn or
severe head injury.
Other than the four statutory examples given as definitions of a “catastrophic injury”, we did not know what the
legislature intended to mean by the term “catastrophic injury.” We did not know, for example, whether the
reference is to the underlying injury only or can include the results of an injury that is not necessarily
catastrophic to begin with but after medical complications arise becomes catastrophic to the injured worker. We
have seen our share of failed lumbar surgeries, chronic pain syndromes, failed knee replacements and other
disastrous results of medical treatment for industrial injuries, and we are not sure whether the legislature
intended to exclude some of these injured workers from receiving WPI ratings for psychiatric conditions that are
caused from an underlying “non-catastrophic” physical injury or treatment from one. In May, 2019, the WCAB
issued its en banc decision in Wilson v. State of California [(2019) 84 Cal. Comp. Cases 393 (Appeals Board en
banc)], which decision indicates a “catastrophic injury” can be the direct injury itself or the consequences of an
injury. See Ch. 6 of this guidebook.
[2] Ratings
Psychiatric injuries are evaluated under AMA Guides Chapter 14, and the 2005 PDRS requires use of the
Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF), which is indicated at Axis V in the DSM-IV diagnosis. The method of
rating permanent impairment for psychiatric injuries has not changed under SB 863 for industrially related
psychiatric injuries that do not fall under the limitations of Labor Code § 4660.1(c). So the description of how to
rate psychiatric impairment has not changed from the recent legislation. The methodology described below,
therefore, applies to mental-mental cases, mental-physical cases, and physical-mental cases where the latter
kind of case involves a violent act or the injured employee was in the proximity of a violent act or the injured
employee suffers from a catastrophic injury.
[3] Elimination of DSM-IV TR and New DSM-5
Labor Code §§ 3208.3 mandates the use of the DSM-III or any other nationally accepted psychiatric diagnosis
criteria for the determination of a psychiatric disorder. Axes I through V of the various diagnostic statistics
manuals have existed in the DSM-III, DSM-IV, and DSM-IV Text Revised editions from the American
Psychiatric Association. Axis V is the GAF score that is the basis of a WPI rating using the 2005 PDRS as
described below. However, on May 10, 2013, the American Psychiatric Association issued its long-awaited
DSM-5, which incorporates current research on mental illness and clinical experience of practitioners.
Many scholars are saying that the DMS-5 is a revolutionary change from prior editions of the Diagnostic
Statistics Manual of Mental Disorders. Among the changes is the total elimination of the use of Axes I through V
and specifically, the elimination of a GAF scoring system. What does this change do to our method of rating
psychiatric permanent disability under the 2005 and 2013 PDRS? The WCAB and appellate courts will have to
make that decision.
Are there alternative methods of evaluating permanent psychiatric disability other than use of the GAF-WPI
method mandated in the 2005 PDRS? One possibility is to tie the work function impairment analysis that is on
page 365 of the AMA Guides 5th Edition with Table 13-8 Emotional or Behavioral Disorders. That method and
others like it have been used to rebut a rating using the GAF-WPI formula described below. However, so far,
Page 3 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
there is no case law on the validity of these alternative methods of rating. Perhaps alternative methods of rating
psychiatric impairment will emerge out of the elimination of the GAF rubric in the DSM-5.
Counsel should purchase a copy of the DSM-5 and use it in the cross examination of psychiatrists and
psychologists. One great example of the changes from the DSM-IV TR to the DSM-5 is the fact that Pain
Disorders that are listed in the DSM-IV TR were eliminated from the DSM-5. In our law practices, we often see
a chronic pain syndrome emerge in an otherwise straight forward orthopedic injury. Here is a quick synopsis of
that issue as the DSM-5 begins to circulate in the mental health and legal arenas.
Pain disorders are now included within diagnostic criteria called Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders. The
common feature of this disorder category is that individuals have “somatic symptoms associated with significant
distress and impairment.” The introduction to this disorder includes the description of the diagnosis is to be
made “on the basis of positive symptoms and signs (distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors in response to these symptoms) rather than the absence of a medical explanation for
somatic complaints” [see DSM-5 p. 309].
This is not to say that every pain disorder results in a mental diagnosis, let alone one that is described in the
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders category. Many pain disorders do have a medical explanation for
symptoms, such as arachnoiditis from failed lumbar surgery, or complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS Type 1
or Type 2), which have independent medical diagnostic criteria of their own.
However, the DSM-5 authors agree that if there is a somatic component (as opposed to an objective
explanation) for chronic pain, then the “somatic component adds severity and complexity to depressive and
anxiety disorders and results in higher severity, functional impairment, and even refractoriness to traditional
treatments” [see DSM-5 p. 310].
The DSM-5 authors also have included “psychological factors affecting other medical conditions” as part of the
new rubric of Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders. The essential feature of psychological factors affecting
other medical conditions “is the presence of one or more clinically significant psychological or behavioral factors
that adversely affect a medical condition by increasing the risk for suffering, death, or disability” [see DSM-5 p.
310].
The term “chronic pain” is mentioned in the DSM-5 only a few times, including on page 813 of the DSM-5,
which states: “Some individuals with chronic pain would be appropriately diagnosed as having somatic
symptom disorder, with predominant pain. For others, psychological factors affecting other medical conditions
or an adjustment disorder would be more appropriate.” As was true in the DSM-IV TR, you have to read the
specific diagnostic criteria for Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders, psychological factors affecting other
medical conditions, and adjustment disorder to determine which diagnostic criteria is the most accurate in a
given case.
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders have three categories—A, B, and C—that provide the diagnosis.
Category A requires “[o]ne or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of
daily life” and requires the diagnostician to specify “with predominant pain.” Category B requires “[e]xcessive
thoughts, feelings or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms” as manifested by at least one of the following:
“… [d]isproportionate and persistent [severe symptoms lasting for more than 6 months] thoughts about the
seriousness of one’s symptoms”; “… [p]ersistently high level of anxiety about health or symptoms”; or “…
[e]xcessive time and energy devoted to these symptoms or health concerns.” The Category B symptoms must
be described as mild, moderate or severe as defined on page 311 of the DSM-5. Category C requires somatic
symptoms to last at least six months [see DSM-5 p. 311].
Attorneys will have to first determine whether there is any objective evidence of a pain disorder. If there is, then
a mental disorder diagnosis may not be applicable, or one may exist concurrently with a pain disorder that is
supported by objective evidence, e.g., traumatic amputation of a hand. If there is not objective evidence of a
pain disorder, then the diagnostic criteria on page 311 of the DSM-5 may apply. Counsel must make sure that a
clinician who diagnoses a pain disorder evaluate the case using the Somatic Symptom Disorder criteria and, as
the text advises, also evaluate a case using the diagnostic criteria separately for adjustment disorders and
psychological factors affecting a medical condition [see DSM-5 p. 322].
Everyone is reminded that science evolves faster than the law. Currently, medicine has completely revised the
diagnostic criteria for hypertension (The American Heart Association Guidelines for Hypertension November
Page 4 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
2019), Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (totally revised diagnostic criteria in the DSM-5 in 2013), and pain
disorders (totally revised as Somatic Related Disorders in the DSM-5 in 2013) to name a few. Physicians
should use the current diagnostic criteria that science currently provides based on evidence-based medicine,
but impairment ratings must be determined under the AMA Guides 5th Edition as mandated by Labor Code
§§ 4660 and 4660.1.
[4] Determination of WPI Ratings Using the GAF Score
The 2005 PDRS, pages 1-12 through 1-15, sets forth the methodology of determining the GAF for a patient.
This is performed as a part of the usual evaluation of a patient by a psychiatrist or psychologist. The medical
determination of the psychiatric condition in terms of symptom severity and effect on functioning of activities of
daily living must be based upon substantial medical evidence that includes a clinical evaluation, review of
medical records, and the patient’s history from reliable sources [see AMA Guides Chapter 14]. If you encounter
a psychiatrist or psychologist who has completely adopted use of the DSM-5 and specifically rejects the use of
the DSM-IV TR, counsel should ask the doctor what an injured worker’s GAF score is at the time of MMI so that
a strict WPI rating can be determined.
Steps 1 through 4 on page 1-13 of the 2005 PDRS are to be performed by the physician to determine which
GAF range a patient belongs and which specific GAF rating within a 10-point range applies based upon
whether the person is functioning at the higher or lower end of the 10-point range. The physician is required to
consider psychological, social, and occupational functioning on a hypothetical continuum of mental health-
illness.
Instructions for Determining a GAF score:
• STEP 1: Starting at the top level of the GAF scale, evaluate each range by asking “is either the
individual’s symptom severity or level of functioning worse than what is indicated in the range
description?”
• STEP 2: Keep moving down the scale until the range that best matches the individual’s symptom severity
or the level of functioning is reached, whichever is worse.
• STEP 3: Look at the next lower range as a double check against having stopped prematurely in Step 2.
This range should be too severe on both symptom severity and level of functioning. If it is, the
appropriate range has been reached (continue with Step 4). If not, go back to Step 2 and continue
moving down the scale.
• STEP 4: To determine specific GAF rating within the selected 10-point range, consider whether the
individual is functioning at the higher or lower end of the 10-point range. For example, consider an
individual who hears voices that do not influence his or her behavior (e.g., someone with long standing
Schizophrenia who accepts his or her hallucinations as part of his or her illness). If the voices occur
relatively infrequently (once a week or less), a rating of 39 or 40 might be most appropriate. In contrast,
if the individual hears voices almost continuously, a rating of 31 or 32 would be more appropriate. See
pages 1-14 and 1-15 of the 2005 PDRS for the GAF ratings.
The GAF is then converted to whole person impairment (WPI) rating on the table found at page 1-16 of the
2005. The eight work function impairment ratings are no longer used, unless a doctor has indicated the
existence of permanent psychiatric disability prior to the adoption of the 2005 PDRS [Labor Code § 4660(d)].
The new psychiatric protocols for rating permanent impairment are based upon nationally recognized
standards. Unlike the prior eight work function impairment ratings that were used under the 1997 Rating
Schedule, psychiatrists and psychologists throughout the nation are now able to rate permanent psychiatric
impairments under the 2005 PDRS.
Once the physician determines the whole person impairment rating using the GAF scale, the WPI is converted
to permanent disability. The future earning capacity adjustment for a psychiatric impairment causes the WPI to
be increased by 40% based upon the FEC adjustment on page 2-3, and the chart on pages 2-6 and 2-7 of the
2005 PDRS. That rating is then adjusted for occupation and age using the same sections of the schedule as for
Page 5 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
physical injuries. Use Section 5, pages 5-1 through 5-3 for adjustment of the rating for occupation, and Section
6, pages 6-1 through 6-5 for adjustment of the rating for the injured employee’s age on the date of injury.
PRACTICE POINT:
When prosecuting or defending a psychiatric claim, the practitioner should always confirm the proper
sequential analysis of the GAF as described in the 2005 PDRS by the evaluating or treating physician.
The GAF scale can be very subjective, despite the requirement that it be based upon solid medical
evidence from the patient’s verifiable history, psychological testing, clinical examinations, and medical
record review.
[5] Informal Ratings and Formal Rating Instructions in an AMA Guides Case
[a] Informal Ratings and the Roles of Judges and Raters
The role of the Disability Evaluation Unit (the “raters”) has exponentially increased since the development of
the 2005 PDRS. The raters, some of whom helped develop the 2005 PDRS, have more familiarity with the
AMA Guides than any other group of people involved in the workers’ compensation community except for a
select few physicians who have been using the AMA Guides for years. In 2020, we are seeing many of the
pioneering DEU raters retire and the institutional knowledge of how to apply the 1997 PDRS and the
rationale of the development of the 2005 PDRS are diminishing. But many of the raters who developed the
2005 PDRS are retired and the new generation of DEU raters have become the front-line raters. Counsel is
cautioned about the accuracy of some informal ratings that are requested from the DEU. We are seeing a
high error rate even by the professional staff, and counsel needs to be very familiar with the rating
techniques described in this guidebook so that rating mistakes can be recognized and corrected. Many
workers’ compensation judges are issuing their own ratings based on their own rating instructions in order
to avoid rating errors. Judges are not allowed to communicate with a rater in a given case because doing
so would be a prohibited ex-parte communication based on Blackledge v. Bank of America [(2010) 75 Cal.
Comp. Cases 613 (Appeals Board en banc decision)].
However, to put it delicately, the raters are not the final arbiters of whether a medical report is AMA
compliant or whether a medical report constitutes substantial evidence in a case [see Ch. 4 of this
guidebook]. Only the WCAB and trial judges are able to make those types of determinations, which
determinations are both questions of fact and law. The AMA Guides are only guidelines for the
determination of permanent disability and are prima facie evidence of permanent disability pursuant to
Labor Code § 4660(c). See the discussion of extrinsic evidence in an AMA Guides case in Ch. 7 of this
guidebook. The AMA Guides do not cover all injuries or medical conditions, and there are significant
inconsistencies within the AMA Guides that cast doubt in a strict application of them in workers’
compensation cases. There is a tenuous and somewhat arbitrary link between functional loss and loss of
range of motion for certain body parts, especially the spine, whereas loss of motion is a significant cause of
functional deficits for other body parts, such as the knees, ankles, or shoulders.
In addition, the AMA Guides are a clear example of when medicine and law collide even though the intent is
to merge the two into the workers’ compensation system. There are issues discussed in this section on the
role of medical evidence as interpreted by a rater and legal conclusions that a workers’ compensation judge
must make that may be based upon the legal meaning of medical terms used in the AMA Guides. For
example, the legal definition of the terms “injury” or “soft tissue lesion” or “palpable defect” may be subject
to judicial interpretation, while those terms may be taken literally for their meaning in a medical or rating
context under the AMA Guides.
We are also seeing significant variation and inconsistencies between the raters’ determinations, even within
the same WCAB offices, with respect to their interpretation of what the 2005 PDRS requires and how a
physician is to use the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides.
Page 6 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
For example, in a case involving bilateral fractured ankles with an open reduction and internal fixation on
one side and casting on the other side, the rater concluded in an informal rating at a rating mandatory
settlement conference that the AME’s permanent and stationary report rated 0% whole person impairment.
The AME indicated that the applicant’s range of motion for his ankles was normal, but he could not heel or
toe walk due to muscle weakness from the injury, and gave the applicant a 25% whole person impairment
rating based upon the AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Tables 17-7, page 531, and 17-8, page 532, muscle
weakness. A different rater agreed that the AME’s report with the 25% WPI was correct. Ultimately, cases
like this may go to a full hearing with formal rating instructions. May a WCJ ignore the rater’s conclusion
that the report rates 0% WPI even though the AME concludes the WPI is 25%?
We are further seeing raters indicate that an AME’s medical report is not ratable in spinal injuries because
the AME used the ROM method instead of the DRE method. The AMA Guides mandate that a physician
use the DRE method if the spinal condition is caused by an “injury.” However, nowhere in the AMA Guides
is the term “injury” defined.
The authors of the AMA Guides did not contemplate the concept of a continuous trauma injury in which
work activities over time contribute to the development of a medical condition. In addition, the ROM
method, set forth in the AMA Guides Table 15-7, page 404, ratings of spinal disorders, refers to “soft tissue
lesions.” Nowhere in the AMA Guides is the term “soft tissue lesion” defined, leaving a lot of room for
medical and legal interpretation by physicians, raters, and eventually judges on when a ROM method of
determining a spinal impairment is applicable if a rating is different than a rating based upon the DRE
method. Some judges are using Labor Code § 3202 to grant benefits in a spinal injury case that rates a 0%
WPI under the DRE, but is ratable to 13% WPI on the ROM method, even though the spinal condition was
a result of a specific injury. See Ch. 3, § 3.15 in this guidebook for a discussion of the “DRE Gap.”
Some raters are taking the position that a continuous trauma spinal injury is equivalent to a “recurrent disc”
injury and, therefore, meets the AMA Guides’ criteria for using the ROM method and not the DRE method if
the ROM method results in a higher impairment rating. Other raters use a strict interpretation of the AMA
Guides and only use the ROM method if there is a listed reason within Chapter 15 of the AMA Guides to
justify use of that method. Whether this latter approach is correct will be determined by case law.
The inconsistencies and variation between the raters’ determinations are not a new phenomenon. Under
the 1997 and earlier versions of the PDRS, it appeared that the statistical concept of “inter-rater reliability”
was lacking. Inter-rater liability (no pun intended) means that if you give a set of data to a group of 100
people, 95 out of 100 people will come to the same conclusion within 5% of each other or at least within two
standard deviations. In the context of workers’ compensation, you would want 95 out of 100 raters to rate
the same medical report within 5% of permanent disability of each other. This would indicate consistency
and reliability between raters’ determinations.
Sixteen years after adoption of the 2005 PDRS, there is no published field data of what the inter-rater
reliability is as of this year for rating medical reports under the AMA Guides. This is not intended to criticize
the DEU or the raters, but rather to raise the issue here so that counsel, physicians, and judges understand
the need to develop the record before, during, and sometimes after a trial in an AMA Guides case. Along
with the rest of us, the raters will become more experienced with these cases, and eventually case law will
also provide guidance to achieve consistency in rating medical reports. See [b], below, about the roles of
the physician, the DEU rater, the judge, the parties, and counsel under Blackledge v. Bank of America
[(2010) 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 613 (Appeals Board en banc decision)].
[b] Formal Rating Instructions
[i] The Roles of Judges and Raters
The formal rating process after a trial on the merits of a case is mandated by the WCAB Rules of
Practice and Procedure § 10675 [8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10675], which states in relevant part:
The [WCAB] may request the Disability Evaluation Unit to prepare a formal rating determination on
a form prescribed for that purpose by the Administrative Director. The request may refer to an
accompanying medical report or chart for the sole purpose of describing measurable physical
Page 7 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
elements of the condition that are clearly and exactly identifiable. In every instance, the request
shall describe the factors of disability in full …
The report of the Disability Evaluation Unit in response to the request shall constitute evidence
only as to the percentage of the permanent disability based upon the factors described, and the
report shall not constitute evidence as to the existence of the permanent disability described ….
The first paragraph in WCAB Rule 10675 indicates that the WCJ’s rating instructions may refer to an
actual medical report or chart, but in every formal rating instruction the request for a formal rating must
describe the factors of disability in full. What about measurable physical elements of the condition that
are not “clearly and exactly identifiable,” such as pain, fatigue, or a spinal case in which ROM is more
accurate than DRE, or vice versa? WCAB Rule 10675 mandates that the WCAB or WCJ has the
ultimate discretion to determine an injured worker’s overall permanent disability.
The second paragraph in WCAB Rule 10675 indicates that the formal rating that is issued in response
to the WCAB’s or WCJ’s instructions must constitute evidence only as to the percentage of permanent
disability, but the report by the DEU rater “shall not constitute evidence as to the existence of the
permanent disability described” since the determination of whether and how much the injured worker
has permanent disability is a legal question to be decided by the WCAB or WCJ.
The role of the DEU rater in these cases needs to be clarified by case law or internal practice and
procedure guidelines in order to avoid any conflict in the decision-making process between a DEU rater
and a WCJ about whether a medical report is AMA compliant and “ratable,” especially if the rater
indicates that a medical report is not ratable and a party argues otherwise. This is why the WCAB and
WCJs need to become familiar with the AMA Guides and the California 2005 PDRS.
For many decades, a WCJ was presumed to be an expert at rating permanent disability, and decisions
could be issued by a judge without a formal rating [see, e.g., Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. v. I.A.C.
(Serafin) (1948) 33 Cal. 2d 89, 13 Cal. Comp. Cases 267, 199 P.2d 302]. Does the Serafin case
currently apply in an AMA Guides case? Hopefully, it does, and it will continue to do so. In order to do
substantial justice in every case as mandated by Art. XIV, Section IV of the California Constitution, trial
judges and the WCAB itself must become proficient at determining whether a medical report is AMA
compliant [see Ch. 4 of this guidebook], is consistent with the 2005 PDRS, and can be rated by the
judge or WCAB without the assistance of a rater.
Simply asking a rater to rate a medical report in a formal rating instruction can affect the judicial
process and merge the judicial role with the role of a rater, who is an expert witness only. The judges
should have an independent way of evaluating the evidence, including having knowledge of the AMA
Guides and the 2005 PDRS, and utilize the raters when there is some technical question about a
medical report’s ratability. However, the judges should have the education, skill, and knowledge, and
should eventually develop the experience, to determine AMA compliance of a medical report, rate it,
and send out a decision without the assistance of a rater in many cases.
The best example is one involving the “DRE Gap,” which is an inherent flaw of the AMA Guides
Chapter 15, The Spine [see Ch. 3, § 3.15 of this guidebook]. If an applicant has a low back strain with
no evidence of radiculopathy, but has palpable muscle spasms, loss of range of motion, and a minor
soft tissue lesion (like a bulge that is sub-clinical), a DRE rating of Category I is appropriate with a WPI
of 0%.
However, a WCJ under Labor Code § 3202 may want to rate the case under the ROM method to be fair
to the applicant since the ROM method may rate 4–8% WPI for the spinal diagnosis under AMA Guides
Table 15-7, page 404, combined with the ratings for loss of range of motion and none for any
neurological deficits. A rater may simply conclude that this is a DRE Category I under the AMA Guides
that rates 0% WPI because the condition was caused by an “injury” and the ROM method was not
appropriate, without regard to any application of Labor Code § 3202. A rater may choose between DRE
and ROM based upon a medical report on a strict application of the AMA Guides without regard to a
judge deciding which method of rating is more accurate for the individual’s case, given the ambiguity of
what constitutes an “injury” to require the use of the DRE method.
Page 8 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
We now have case law that allows a party to rebut an impairment rating under the AMA Guides 5th
Edition (see the discussion of Milpitas Unified School District v. WCAB (Guzman) [(2010) 75 Cal.
Comp. Cases 837], referred to as “Guzman III” in Chapter 7 of this guidebook). The role of the rater has
become more limited in light of the WCAB en banc and published court of appeal decision that allow
the parties to develop the record and for the judge to determine the ultimate rating of a case.
Remember, the DEU raters are experts in the strict application of the AMA Guides. It is likely that raters
will continue to issue advisory and informal ratings utilizing a strict interpretation of the descriptions and
measurements of the Guides. However, the raters are required to issue formal ratings based upon a
WCJ’s instructions that may include a rebuttal of a strict impairment rating. If the parties agree to ask
the DEU rater to rate a report under both a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides and the Guzman
case, he or she will.
[ii] Seven Methods of Rating Instructions—The Blackledge Case
[A] WCAB’s Six Guidelines for Formal Rating Instructions
In prior editions of this guidebook, seven methods of formal rating instructions were described that
a WCJ could utilize. On June 3, 2010, the WCAB issued its en banc decision in Blackledge v. Bank
of America [(2010) 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 613 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]. In Blackledge,
the WCAB set forth the ground rules for the role of the WCJ, the DEU rater and the parties in the
development of formal rating instructions in disputed permanent disability cases. Prior to
Blackledge, there was no published appellate decision that provided any interpretation of Rule
10675 and its application in cases that involved WPI ratings under the AMA Guides. A thorough
discussion of the Blackledge case is appropriate here with the seven methods of formal rating
instructions to follow.
The WCAB decision in Blackledge is the first published appellate decision since the reforms of SB
899 which modernize and describe the division of labor between the doctor, the judge, the DEU
raters and the parties in disputed permanent disability cases in which formal rating instructions
must be issued by a WCJ.
In previous editions of this guidebook, six or seven suggested formal rating instructions were listed
as guidelines. These ranged from the WCJ actually issuing his or her own ratings without DEU
assistance to simply instructing the DEU to “please rate Dr. Smith’s June 19, 2008 report.” The
Blackledge case outlines the do’s and don’ts of formal rating instructions to be issued by judges in
disputed cases where the parties cannot agree on a permanent disability rating.
The facts in Blackledge are not that important to recite here because the WCAB gives procedural
instructions for all participants on how formal permanent disability rating instructions are to be
developed by trial judges. Suffice it to say that the rating dispute in Blackledge involved an AME’s
conclusions that the injured worker had a spinal condition that rated a DRE II 5% with a 3% WPI
pain add-on or 8% WPI that already takes into account a slightly greater than expected effect on
ADL functioning. It was unclear from the record how the AME concluded the applicant had a DRE II
impairment in the first place. The AME also assigned a 2% WPI for patellofemoral crepitation in a
knee pursuant to a footnote under Table 17-31 that allows for that WPI rating but where clinically,
the AME was unclear in his report whether the applicant fit that category.
The WCJ rating instructions utilized a “fill in the blanks” formal rating instruction form courtesy of
EAMS:
“PLEASE DETERMINE THE PERCENTAGES OF PERMANENT DISABILITY BY TAKING
INTO ACCOUNT THE NATURE OF THE PHYSICAL INJURY OR DISFIGUREMENT
INCLUDING THE DESCRIPTIONS AND MEASUREMENTS OF PHYSICAL IMPAIRMENTS
AND THE CORRESPONDING PERCENTAGES OF IMPAIRMENTS PUBLISHED IN THE
AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (AMA) GUIDES TO THE EVLUATION OF
PERMANENT IMPAIRMENT (5TH EDITION) FOR THE Low back, Right Wrist, Right Hip and
Right Knee
Page 9 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
(BODY PARTS)
______________________ IN REPORT OF: David B. Pechman MD DATED: May 14, 2007
ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS:
(X) Consider a 3% add-on for pain.
ATTACH PERMANENT DISABILITY RATING BASED ON ABOVE INSTRUCTIONS”
The DEU rater issued the ratings based on these instructions as a 0% permanent disability. The
DEU rater testified in essence that the AME’s report should have rated 0% WPI because the
applicant did not fit any DRE II category and did not fall into the criteria listed in the footnote for
crepitation. The rater’s conclusions were based on the fact he had to exercise some independent
judgment, and he “mechanically applied the AMA Guides” to find no ratable permanent disability.
The WCJ found that the applicant suffered a 10% permanent disability, and the defendant filed its
Petition for Reconsideration, which led to this en banc decision.
The WCAB issued six guidelines for everyone to use in disputed permanent disability cases in
which formal rating instructions may be issued by a judge:
1. The physician’s role is to assess the injured employee’s WPI by a report that sets forth facts
and reasoning to support its conclusions and that comports with the AMA Guides and case
law. (The WCAB then refers you to a footnote that adopts its decisions in Almaraz-
Guzman II, and presumably now, Guzman III. See Ch. 7 of this guidebook for a discussion
of case law currently in effect for this component of the Blackledge decision.)
2. In the context of a formal rating, the WCJ’s role is to frame instructions based on substantial
medical evidence that specifically and fully describe the WPI to be rated; in addition, a
WCJ’s instructions may ask a rater to offer an expert opinion on what WPI should or
should not be rated.
3. In the context of a formal rating, the rater’s role is to issue a recommended permanent
disability rating based solely on the WCJ’s formal rating instructions; unless specifically
instructed to do so, a rater has no authority to issue a rating based on the rater’s own
assessment of whether the WPI ratings referred to in the WCJ’s instructions are based on
substantial evidence or are consistent with the AMA Guides.
4. A WCJ is not bound by a rater’s recommended permanent disability rating, and a WCJ may
elect to independently rate an employee’s permanent disability; however, a WCJ’s rating
still must be based on substantial evidence.
5. Potential AMA Guides rating problems may be minimized by the early and proper use of
non-formal ratings; and
6. In the context of a formal rating, there must be no ex-parte communication between the WCJ
and the assigned rater.
[B] Physician Ground Rules
The first step, of course, is for the physician to do it right the first time. That is for his or her
evaluating or treating MMI report to constitute substantial medical evidence in that he or she
properly uses the AMA Guides whether under a strict use or alternative rating method allowed
under Guzman III. See Ch. 7 of this guidebook for a discussion on alternative rating methods using
the AMA Guides 5th Edition. The physician’s report must comply with Section 2.6 of the AMA
Guides along with Labor Code § 4628 and 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10682. See Ch. 4, § 4.03[2] of this
guidebook for a list of all required elements for an AMA compliant report. On page 7-8 of the
Blackledge decision, the WCAB states:
The impairment evaluation includes a discussion of the employee’s history and symptoms, the
results of the physician’s examination, the results of various tests and diagnostic procedures,
the diagnosis, the anticipated clinical course, the need for further treatment, and the residual
Page 10 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
functional capacity and ability to perform activities of daily living. After considering all of these
factors, the physician compares the medical findings for each condition with the impairment
criteria listed within the Guides and then calculates the appropriate impairment ratings for the
conditions. The physician’s report should include a summary list of the impairments and
impairment ratings by percentage, together with a calculation of the final WPI, and a statement
of the rationale underlying the WPI opinion.
Notice that the WCAB includes “residual functional capacity”, which is listed in section 2.6 of the
AMA Guides. It appears that in light of recent case law, the WCAB expects physicians to evaluate
the effects of an impairment on the injured worker’s work function capacity in addition to the effects
on ADL functioning. The WCAB then goes on to point out that the WPI ratings for each medical
condition must be fully described by the physician because “the Guides do not address all medical
conditions” and many ratings have a range and the physician must state what WPI percentage
within a range the particular case belongs.
The WCAB then sets forth ground rules for formal rating instructions by a WCJ, starting with 8 Cal.
Code Reg. § 10675, which requires that after reviewing the evidence, it is the WCJ’s function to
formulate rating instructions that are tentative findings of fact. The formal rating instructions “may
refer to an accompanying medical report or chart for the sole purpose of describing measurable
physical elements of the conditions that are clearly and exactly identifiable” and in every respect
formal rating instructions “shall describe the factors of disability in full.”
[C] WCJ Ground Rules
So here are some ground rules for WCJs that are mostly directly quoted from the WCAB decision
in Blackledge:
1. “A WCJ’s rating instructions must specify what WPI(s) are to be rated. The WCJ may direct a
rater to rate the injured employee’s permanent disability specifying the WPI percentage to
be used for each injured body part”; or
2. A WCJ may instruct the rater to “utilize the WPI(s) contained in clearly identified portions of a
specified report or reports by delineating the date of the report, the author and specific
page references.”
3. If the WCJ gives the rater formal instructions and to utilize specific WPI ratings, the WCJ has
already “concluded that all of those WPI ratings are based on substantial medical
evidence.”
4. The WCJ may seek assistance of a rater to “use his or her expertise [as a rater] to assess
whether a specified medical report accurately applies the AMA Guides and, if not, to
separately give an opinion on whether the WPI(s) should be higher or lower and why.”
5. “If the rater believes the physician’s report does not correctly apply the AMA Guides, then
the rater can communicate any concerns to the WCJ by memorandum in accordance with
Section 1.50 of the WCAB/DWC Policy and Procedure Manual.”
6. “If the WCJ is persuaded by the rater’s memorandum, the WCJ can either issue new rating
instructions that take the rater’s concerns into account or take other appropriate action,
such as directing further development of the record to clarify the proper WPI(s).”
7. “Seeking the assistance of the rater should occur infrequently and under no circumstances
should be WCJ abdicate responsibility for the comprehensive assessment of the
employee’s WPI(s) to the rater under the guise of asking for the rater’s expert assistance.”
8. “The assistance of the rater should be sought only after the WCJ has thoroughly reviewed
the physician’s report(s) in conjunction with the AMA Guides and has fully described the
WPI(s) to be rated to the best of the WCJ’s understanding, yet, the WCJ still is uncertain
whether the physician’s report(s) comports with the AMA Guides.”
Page 11 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
9. “A WCJ has special expertise in rating and he or she may rate an employee’s permanent
disability without a formal rating. Nevertheless, when the WCJ personally rates a case, the
rating must be based on substantial evidence.”
10. “There shall be no ex-parte communication between the trial judge and the rater who will be
preparing the formal rating. Section 1.50 of the P&P Manual permits the WCJ and the rater
to exchange memoranda regarding the rating, it further requires that these memoranda be
served on the parties to the case.”
11. A WCJ may use a standardized template “fill in the blanks” rating instruction form but it is
still the WCJ’s responsibility to describe the factors of disability in full in compliance with
Rule 10675. The WCAB clearly rejected the template used in the Blackledge case even
though the WCJ used the one provided under the EAMS program.
[D] Rater Ground Rules
Here are the salient points the WCAB made in Blackledge on the role of the raters in formal rating
instruction cases:
1. A rater “is an expert witness only in the application of the rating schedule” and “is required to
make his or her formal rating recommendation solely on the information provided by the
WCJ.”
2. A rater “is not a trier of fact and has no fact-finding power.”
3. A rater “cannot depart from the rating instructions or omit any factors of disability described
therein from the recommended rating.”
4. “Once a WCJ has prepared formal rating instructions, a rater must recommend a permanent
disability rating based strictly on those instructions. If a rater’s recommended rating
disregards or departs from the instructions, then the WCJ may direct the rater to re-rate in
accordance with the instructions.”
5. “There may be occasional instances where a WCJ is uncertain whether a physician’s report
is entirely consonant with the AMA Guides. In these instances after fully describing the
WPI(s) to be rated, the WCJ may also request the rater’s expertise in assessing whether
the report(s) relied upon properly applied the AMA Guides. In these limited circumstances,
the rater, after issuing a recommended rating using the specified WPI(s), may also give an
opinion explaining whether the WPI(s) should be increased or decreased and the rationale
therefore.”
6. “Because a rater is an expert witness only in the application of the rating schedule, the rater
cannot substitute his or her lay judgment on medical issues for that of the reporting
physician.”
7. “In the absence of a specific request from the WCJ, under no circumstances may a rater
either deviate from the WCJ’s formal rating instructions or offer an unsolicited opinion
regarding the appropriate WPI(s). Permitting a rater to do so would mean that the rater
would effectively displace the WCJ as the trier of fact.”
8. “A rater must follow published appellate decisions and en banc decisions of the Appeals
Board.”
9. For non-formal ratings requested by a party, “the rater may use his or her expertise to
annotate any errors or defects that the rater believes exist in the [medical] report and to
annotate the higher or lower WPI(s) that would result if the AMA Guides was applied
correctly … If the annotated rating identified potential defects in the physician’s application
of the AMA Guides a WCJ may order a case off calendar or continue the hearing to allow
the parties to obtain a clarifying supplemental report or to depose the physician.”
Page 12 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
[E] Parties’ Ground Rules
The WCAB also included some guidelines for parties in the Blackledge case that are helpful:
1. There are three types of non-formal ratings: informal rating determinations (before an
application is filed, 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10167(a)); summary rating determinations
(applicant is not represented, and application has not been filed 8 Cal. Code Reg.
§ 10160.1); consultative rating determinations (allowed before or after an application has
been filed, regardless of whether the applicant is represented; or authorized by judge or
I&A Officer for unrepresented if application is filed, 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10166). These non-
formal ratings are not admissible in WCAB proceedings and there is no statutory authority
for the admission of any non-formal ratings. See Labor Code § 5703 and 8 Cal. Code Reg.
§ 10166(b).
2. The parties may ask a rater for clarification on any aspects of a non-formal rating and the
rater may give his or her opinion about errors or defects in the medical evidence being
reviewed by the rater that formed the basis for a permanent disability non-formal rating.
This must be done prior to any formal rating instruction issued by a WCJ in a case.
3. “If the WCJ does not request assistance from the rater” for a formal rating instruction, “then it
is the responsibility of one of the parties, not the rater, to point out any errors in the WCJ’s
formal rating instructions.”
4. Parties are encouraged by the WCAB en banc decision to obtain corrections or clarifications
of the physician’s conclusions as to how and why WPI ratings were determined prior to
submission of the case to a judge for formal rating instructions.
[F] Practical Considerations
Trial experience since the enactment of SB 899 reflects that counsel should always be aware of
what proposed formal rating instructions should look like in a given case. In fact, specific sections
of medical reports and physician deposition transcripts should be identified and set forth for the
WCJ to refer to if there is a need for formal rating instructions. If counsel intends to use a
physician’s deposition testimony as part of a proposed rating instruction, counsel should do two
things. First, identify the exact page numbers and line numbers where the physician provides the
WPI ratings and his or her rationale thereof; and second, ask the doctor at the conclusion of the
deposition about his or her final opinion that differs from the conclusions in the written medical
reports. This avoids driving the trial judge crazy in having to read an entire deposition transcript of a
physician where most of the pages consist of two or more attorneys arguing with each other.
Best practice is for counsel to provide proposed ratings in a Declaration of Readiness to Proceed to
begin the process towards either settlement of the case or to formal rating instructions. If the case
does not resolve prior to the conclusion of a mandatory settlement conference, then counsel is
advised to provide the formal ratings in the MSC pre-trial conference statement along with specific
references to the medical reports and or deposition testimony of the physician being relied upon for
formal ratings [see Labor Code § 5502(d)(3)].
In addition, Labor Code § 5502(d)(3) mandates that at a mandatory settlement conference, if the
parties are unable to resolve the case, each party shall indicate the proposed permanent disability
rating string in the Pre-Trial Conference Statement. Counsel’s compliance with this mandate will
avoid delaying the trial since at many of the WCAB District Offices, the DEU raters may not be
available to give the parties consultative ratings on the trial date. If counsel is unable to provide
proposed ratings, the DEU should be consulted and a request for the DEU to mail informal ratings
to the parties before the trial date would indicate best practices.
Page 13 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
An even better best practice would have the party who files a Declaration of Readiness To Proceed
(DOR) indicate in the DOR what counsel thinks the permanent disability rating string should be,
based on the evidence he or she is relying on.
With that information at hand, the WCJ will know precisely what rating a party thinks is the most
accurate and that it is based on substantial evidence with the actual language in the medical report
and deposition testimony specifically at hand to justify the proposed WPI ratings. Counsel should
also include reference to the physician’s conclusions about how and why WPI ratings are the most
accurate in the case. That way, when the WCJ sits down to actually read the medical evidence in
the case, he or she has at his or her hands the actual proposed rating along with the underlying
instructions that you derived from the specific medical findings by the physician upon whom you
rely.
Experience shows that counsel should read the medical evidence at the time a Declaration of
Readiness to Proceed is filed or at least by the time of the mandatory settlement conference so that
a proposed rating and proposed rating instructions are provided to the WCJ at the time of the MSC
and then again at the time of trial and are a part of the record, essentially in the issues section of
the MSC statement.
For example, in a disputed wrist injury case that was submitted for a formal rating at trial, the
applicant submitted proposed rating instructions that included a proposed rating string using the
2005 PDRS and reference to “page 9 of the panel QME’s report, last paragraph going to the top of
page 10 first sentence” as the applicant’s proposed formal rating instruction. In the referred section
of the medical report, the physician stated which one of three separate earlier described rating
methods he used for the right wrist condition was the most accurate, how and why he adopted the
final one and that it was based on reasonable medical probability.
The WCJ’s formal rating instructions requested the rater to “please rate page 9, last paragraph to
the top of page 10 first sentence” of the panel QME’s report, precisely what the applicant’s counsel
requested resulting in the requested rating. Defense counsel wanted the lowest rating given in one
of the other two methods described by the physician earlier in his QME report. The WCJ adopted
the same reference as the proposed rating instruction submitted at the MSC and again at trial on
the record. Since this case issued prior to the Blackledge decision, counsel should now give the
WCJ proposed formal rating instructions actually quoting the sections of the report verbatim and
referring to its location(s) in the report or physician deposition transcript.
Always list your proposed ratings or rating instructions in the Pre-Trial Conference Statement
(PTCS) at the Mandatory Settlement Conference. This will assist the trial judge to understand any
permanent disability rating issues that counsel has in the case. It is not helpful to a trial judge to
simply say in the PTCS that your opponent’s medical report “does not constitute substantial
medical evidence.” This is because every decision by a judge should be based on substantial
medical evidence and the trial judge’s job is to make sure at least one report meets that standard
and if not to develop the record.
[G] Requesting Cross Examination of the Rater or Objecting to Formal Rating Instructions
So now that Blackledge has clarified the roles of the WCJ and the raters, is it appropriate for an
attorney during cross-examination of a rater to ask “Shouldn’t this case be rated under the DRE
method instead of ROM since the spinal condition was caused by an acute injury?” This question
addresses the ultimate issue of what permanent disability the injured employee has in his or her
case and it is not a proper question to be asked of a rater. This type of question not only second
guesses the physician’s conclusions but also invades the purview of the WCJ who ultimately
decides which method, DRE or ROM, applies in a given case. Use of both methods in the same
case may constitute substantial evidence and it is up to the trier of fact to determine which rating
method is the most accurate.
If counsel timely objects to a formal rating pursuant to 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10675, there are three
things that can be objected to—the actual rating issued by the DEU rater, the formal rating
Page 14 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
instructions issued by the WCJ, or both. When you object to the technical rating issued by the DEU
rater, but you do not object to the formal rating instructions, then you should so indicate in the
Declaration of Readiness to Proceed and that you intend to cross-examine the DEU rater on the
technical aspects of the rating only.
If you object to the formal rating instructions that are issued by the WCJ and that result in a DEU
rating that you also object to, then you need to indicate in the Declaration of Readiness that you
object to the formal rating instructions and move to strike them along with a separate objection to
the actual DEU rating. Objecting to both the instructions and the rating preserve your right to ask
the WCJ to revise the rating instructions and for him or her to order the rater to issue a new rating.
Since time is of the essence under 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10675, counsel should always hand carry
any Declaration of Readiness to Proceed requesting cross-examination of the DEU rater and/or a
motion to strike the formal rating instructions to the trial judge’s secretary, along with any electronic
filing of the documents into EAMS.
PRACTICE POINT:
The complexity of rating instructions that are now required in cases that fall under the
AMA Guides is clear. All WCJs are required to become familiar with the AMA Guides,
what constitutes substantial medical evidence under them and under current case law
and to provide accurate formal rating instructions so that the DEU can issue proper
and evidence based permanent disability ratings. The bottom line is conduct your
discovery before you get to the MSC so that the record is clear upon which evidence
the formal rating instructions should be based.
There is no formal WCAB Rule of Practice and Procedure or WCAB Policy and Procedure Manual
requirement that trial judges must use any specific method. Judges are therefore free to use any
method to issue formal rating instructions in a case and be compliant with WCAB Rule 10675 as
long as the method is also consistent with the WCAB en banc decision in Blackledge.
Some additional considerations under Blackledge are important here. If defense or applicant
counsel objects to the conclusions of either a treating or evaluating physician (AME or panel QME)
and feels that a strict or alternative rating instruction should occur, it is advisable to depose the
physician in question prior to trial in order to establish the most accurate rating. If counsel relies on
objecting to a formal rating instruction after a trial, it is too late to develop the record by cross-
examination of a physician! Cross examination of a DEU rater will be limited in scope, since the
rater can only testify that he or she followed the WCJ’s formal rating instructions without question.
Remember, the WCJ can only consult with a DEU rater while the judge is determining formal rating
instructions, and if that consultation occurs, then the WCJ must notify the parties of that
consultation. This requirement, enunciated in Blackledge, is intended to prevent the tail from
wagging the dog—the judge determines the ultimate formal rating instructions and no one else.
If you object to a formal rating instruction either because you object to a scheduled DFEC
adjustment under Ogilvie III or the WPI rating instruction under Guzman III, then you must file a
motion to strike the formal rating instructions and then present rebuttal evidence of what you think
the formal rating instructions should be, based on the evidence. It is only at this point that you can
bring in a private rating expert to rebut the formal ratings. However, that testimony may be too late
since the time to develop the record concerning the WPI rating is before the trial and not after.
However, as you will see in Ch. 7 of this guidebook, a DEU rater, after formal rating instructions
have issued by a WCJ, may be called upon for cross-examination in order to rebut a scheduled
DFEC adjustment factor under Ogilvie III.
Make sure that the WCJ properly issues rating instructions to the DEU rater in a case that has gone
to trial and the permanent disability ratings are in dispute between the parties. We are seeing a
large number of cases that go to trial despite the fact that the parties agreed to an AME and the
Page 15 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
AME provided deposition testimony on how and why he or she came to his or her conclusions
about an impairment rating under the AMA Guides. Asking a rater in formal rating instructions to
“please rate this case based on Dr. Smith’s 9/25/08 report and his deposition dated 11/1/08” may
not comply with WCAB Rules of Practice and Procedure, section 10675, which allows a WCJ to
request a formal rating from a DEU rater:
The request may refer to an accompanying medical report or chart for the sole purpose of
describing measurable physical elements of the condition that are clearly and exactly
identifiable. In every instance, the request shall describe the factors of disability in full.
Counsel is advised to object to a formal rating that issues as a result of formal rating instructions
from a WCJ that is felt to be inadequate or deficient in describing the factors of impairment in full as
part of the judge’s formal instructions. You should file a motion to strike the formal rating and the
rating instructions and request cross examination of the rater in order to establish the proper full
description by the judge as to what impairment needs to be rated.
Workers’ Compensation Judges have been advised to clarify at the time a matter goes to trial
exactly what parts of body are injured and have sustained permanent impairment. An example of
this occurred when a WCJ issued formal rating instructions for a DEU rater to issue ratings for
“injuries to the Applicant’s back and right upper extremity” and the rater dutifully rated the lumbar
spine and right shoulder.
The problem was that the AME in the case concluded that the Applicant sustained injuries
AOE/COE to the lumbar and thoracic spine, right shoulder, right wrist and right elbow and assigned
separate impairment ratings for each. The Applicant’s attorney had to file a motion to strike the
ratings and formal rating instructions so that the WCJ would properly re-issue formal rating
instructions to include all parts of body separately since the lumbar spine has a separate rating
from the thoracic spine along with separate ratings for the shoulder, wrist and elbow.
In order to avoid this type of problem, when the WCJ reviews the stipulations and issues of the
parties at the time of trial, make sure that parts of body injured are specified in accordance with the
correct anatomical parts of body that are ratable from the AMA Guides (fingers, thumb, hand, wrist,
forearm, elbow, upper arm, shoulder, cervical, thoracic, lumbar spine, coccyx, etc.).
[c] Apportionment
The final issue a trial judge has to decide is apportionment, for which there is no role for any rater (DEU or
private) to decide or to include in a rating unless a judge specifically requests it in a formal rating
instruction. Apportionment of permanent disability is a problem under Labor Code § 4664 if there is a prior
award based upon the 1997 Rating Schedule (or one prior to that) and a new AMA Guides case arises
involving the same body part(s). These are “apples and oranges” under separate systems, and you cannot
combine the two systems (unless there is some kind of cross-over developed by research and approved by
the Administrative Director).
An example of this problem is if there is a 1999 Stipulated Award or Findings and Award of 30% permanent
disability to the lumbar spine, and now there is a new 10% WPI in a 2005 injury to the same body part. The
physician would have to default and use Labor Code § 4663 apportionment to determine how much the
current 10% WPI is directly caused by the new injury and what percentage is caused by “other factors,”
including the prior work-related injury that resulted in the prior Award of 30% permanent disability.
[d] Cross-Examination of Raters
In the course of developing the record at trial, attorneys have taken expert witness testimony from DEU and
private raters for years. In a case involving the AMA Guides, expert testimony of raters will become more
important in disputed rating issues. In spinal cases, for example, the question of whether the DRE or ROM
method applies will be a common issue. In lower extremity cases, the question of whether a physician
correctly applied the 13 ways to evaluate those impairments will become an issue whereby a rater’s
testimony about a medical report will be crucial. You may be able to persuade a judge to use one method of
Page 16 of 16
§ 2.06 Psychiatric Injuries
evaluating impairment over another if the other method fits the case more appropriately, using the
testimony of a rater. See Example #6 in Ch. 4, § 4.04[7] of this guidebook involving a knee case in which
the rater chose atrophy as the better impairment rating over the DBE method.
In other words, you must become familiar with the instructions in the AMA Guides to confirm that a
physician complied with them in arriving at his or her conclusions. You should start with Section 2.6 of the
AMA Guides, which is discussed in this guidebook at Ch. 3, § 3.02 and Ch. 4. Then, you need to refer to
the tables, figures, and charts discussed in Ch. 3 of this guidebook to help you determine whether the rater
correctly followed the physician’s physical findings and conclusions. Finally, you need to refer to the 2005
PDRS to see if the impairment code is correct in the rating, along with the FEC adjustment, occupation, and
age adjustments.
CAUTION:
While preparing cross-examination of a rater, do not obtain an ex-parte rating from a different
WCAB rater. The WCAB has determined that “rater shopping” is not only a bad practice, but may
also subject the instigator to a contempt proceeding [see In re Lee (1979) 44 Cal. Comp. Cases
331 (Appeals Board en banc opinion)]. A party may present rebuttal evidence to a DEU rating by
testimony and an advisory rating from a private rater. However, a WCJ will be reluctant to base
his or her decision about the adequacy of a settlement or a decision in a disputed case based
solely on a private rating.
Counsel is also cautioned about the difference between objecting to a judge’s formal rating instructions and
cross-examination of a rater because counsel believes the mechanics of a rating is incorrect. If you object
to the judge’s rating instructions, then you must file a Declaration of Readiness post-trial and specifically
object to the judge’s instructions. The time period to do this is the same as the time period to request cross-
examination of a rater—seven days plus five days mailing from the date the ratings are served on counsel
by the WCAB. The rater would testify he or she was just following the judge’s instructions, so you need to
inform the judge from the receipt of the formal ratings that you object to the judge’s instructions to the rater.
If you object to the mechanics of the rating string, e.g., occupational group number or variant, then you can
call the DEU rater as a witness and clarify the mechanics of the rating string.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 2.07
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 2
Permanent Disability Ratings Under SB 899 and SB 863
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
[1] Introduction
The role of agreed medical examiners and qualified medical examiners in the California workers’ compensation
system has changed dramatically with the advent of the AMA Guides. This section describes the current state
of the legal requirements for medical-legal reporting in connection with industrial injury cases. The examining
physician must be familiar with and apply the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides along with
the 2005 PDRS.
The goal is for medical-legal reporting to constitute substantial medical evidence upon which an award of
benefits to deserving injured workers can be issued by a judge and the award can withstand appellate scrutiny.
Doctors are told at every continuing medical education program that they are “talking” to the judge when they
write their medical-legal reports and if they testify in a deposition. There literally is a back-and-forth
dissemination of information in the form of expert opinions and conclusions that the parties and judges rely on
in making their decisions about the compensability of an alleged injury and the nature and extent of temporary
and permanent disability. That back-and-forth process can be seen in the advocacy or joint letters sent by
counsel for each party to a medical-legal evaluator, and the ideal responses by the medical-legal evaluator to
those letters for or against each issue that is raised by the parties or by a judge.
This author has interviewed physicians throughout the state who are medical-legal evaluators in good standing
and who are on education panels teaching continuing medical education programs. The most credible
physicians, including the leadership of these organizations, all say without hesitation that one of the most
important things they do as part of the medical-legal evaluation process is read counsel’s advocacy letters.
In this section, you will see a model QME report template that was provided during the summer of 2021 to this
author. The idea is to expand the scope of this chapter to provide a back-and-forth exchange of issues and
medical-legal points to be addressed among a medical-legal evaluator, the parties, and the judge. This author
wants to thank the California Orthopedic Association for sharing the model QME report template, discussed
below. Medical-legal evaluators are expected to review relevant records, examine the patient, obtain an
accurate history, and write comprehensive medical-legal reports that a judge and the Appeals Board can rely
on in establishing liability for work injuries and the nature and extent of benefits to be awarded or not.
Along these lines, physicians will be receiving letters from legal counsel and claims administrators that purport
to request compliance with these requirements in medical-legal reporting. Included in this section are some
model joint letters to agreed and qualified medical examiners who are requested to write comprehensive
medical legal reports that are “AMA compliant.” Labor Code § 4062.3 establishes the statutory requirements for
what items may be sent to a QME selected from a panel (“PQME”) for his or her review and when those items
are to be sent to the physician. If the parties agree to an agreed medical examiner (“AME”), they can agree as
to what medical, legal and other materials are to be sent to the AME for review and commentary. As stated
below, the exchange of information between the parties and the AME or PQME will avoid unnecessary delay in
resolving cases and will reduce the need for many supplemental reports when the issues set forth by the
parties are clear to the physician in the first place [see Lab. Code § 4062.3, 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 35; Maxham v.
Calif. Dept. of Corrections and Rehabilitation (2017) 82 Cal. Comp. Cases 136 (WCAB en banc decision)].
An “AMA compliant” medical report must comply with the requirements set forth in Labor Code § 4628, 8 Cal.
Code Reg. § 10682, and Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides.
Page 2 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
In addition, for a medical report to be “AMA compliant,” the physician must correctly utilize the descriptions and
measurements in the AMA Guides in accordance with the instructions, tables, and figures in the AMA Guides
and be consistent with the unique requirements under the 2005 PDRS. It must be emphasized that all
physicians must provide a strict WPI rating for each part of body he or she evaluates and then indicate
whether the strict WPI ratings are accurate under “Guzman III.” It is only at this point that an evaluating or
treating physician can provide any applicable alternative WPI rating for each part of body if the physician
believes that the strict rating is not an accurate description of how an industrial injury affects the injured
worker’s ADL and work functioning.
For a medical report to be “AMA compliant,” the AME or PQME must evaluate the applicant with respect to any
potential body part(s), bodily function(s), or organ system(s) that may be impaired as a direct or indirect result
of an industrial injury. For example, a spinal impairment must be evaluated by a AME or PQME under Chapter
15 of the AMA Guides, The Spine, but the AME or PQME should be astute enough to evaluate a case under
any other applicable chapter in the AMA Guides if the industrial injury to the spine is directly or indirectly
causing an impairment in another body part, function, or system, such as the digestive system (ulcer or GERD
aggravated by NSAIDs—see AMA Guides, Chapter 5, The Digestive System), hearing loss (Ear, Nose, Throat
and Related Structures, hearing loss from chronic use of opiate pain medication—see AMA Guides, Chapter
11), and psyche (Mental and Behavioral Disorders—see AMA Guides, Chapter 14, psychiatric impairment
caused by a general medical condition).
The parties may consider utilizing the joint AME or PQME letter as a way to request the physician to evaluate
an applicant under specific chapters of the AMA Guides as is presented in these model joint letters [see [6],
below] or to simply evaluate the applicant “using the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides”
without specifically referring to any chapters in the AMA Guides.
However, experience is demonstrating that the more information the parties agree in advance to give the AME
or PQME, the more “AMA compliant” the report will be generated by the selected physician. It is strongly
recommended that the parties at least notify an AME or PQME in advance which body parts, bodily functions,
and organ systems are claimed to be impaired as a result of an industrial injury, which are accepted by the
claims administrator, and which are not.
This information should provide guidance to the AME or PQME as to which chapters in the AMA Guides to refer
to and as to which other medical specialists, if any, should be consulted for claimed medical conditions that are
outside the AME’s or PQME’s medical specialty.
[2] Advocacy Letters
In most areas of California, parties routinely send a basic joint AME or PQME letter to the selected physician,
along with an “advocacy letter” that states the medical legal theories of the case from each party’s perspective.
The use of advocacy letters is controversial, but they have been used for years before SB 899 was enacted in
2004. Now that we are using the AMA Guides and because of the learning curve it presents for everyone in the
workers’ compensation system, including many physicians, advocacy letters assist the parties in an AMA
Guides case to develop the record and avoid delays in resolving claims by not having to depose the AME or
PQME or repeatedly request supplemental medical reports from the physician.
However, be careful what you wish for, since many attorneys are more familiar with how the AMA Guides work
and may include a chapter-by-chapter analysis, indicating exactly which specific chapters, tables, and methods
may apply in the case. Experience shows that a nicely worded, neutral joint letter to the physician, whether an
AME or QME, is the most appropriate, especially ones that point out factual or medical nuances of the case or
specific unusual issues to which the parties want the physician to respond.
Recently, in a case known to this author, the defense counsel insisted on advocacy letters be sent to a panel
QME while applicant’s counsel wanted to send a joint neutral letter to the doctor who was unknown to him. The
applicant’s advocacy letter outlined specific chapters, tables, and methods in the AMA Guides, and then
defense counsel objected to applicant counsel’s letter! The WCJ upheld sending the advocacy letters as is,
since the issue was medical and not non-medical information that had to be vetted at least 20 days prior to the
exam under Labor Code § 4062.3. But see and be careful of the distinction between “information” that is sent to
an AME or PQME by a party as opposed to a “communication” that is sent to an AME or PQME by a party.
Page 3 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
See, specifically, Labor Code § 4062.3 for ex-parte communications and the two WCAB en banc decisions that
govern transmission of “information” or a “communication” to an AME or PQME [see Maxham v. California
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (2017) 82 Cal. Comp. Cases 136 (Appeals Board en banc
decision); Suon v. California Dairies (2018) 83 Cal. Comp. Cases 1803 (Appeals Board en banc decision)].
Counsel is urged to read the Maxham and Suon cases cited above that differentiate between information and
communications that are sent to a medical-legal physician.
[3] Joint AME or PQME Letters
The model joint AME letter is separate from the model PQME letter for a number of reasons, including the fact
that the parties voluntarily utilize an AME and to a certain extent do not voluntarily select a PQME the same
way. In addition, the parties have separate obligations with a PQME than with an AME, and the PQME has
separate statutory and regulatory obligations than an AME.
In fact, under SB 863, the parties no longer have to play the “AME-QME dance” under Labor Code §§ 4061 and
4062. Effective 1/1/2013, parties are allowed to go to an AME “at any time” and it appears to include being
allowed even after a panel QME screws up a case. Whoever drafted Labor Code §§ 4061 and 4062 knew about
the low quality of many panel QME reports and the common practice among attorneys to eventually agree to an
AME on all issues when a panel QME’s report and conclusions did not constitute substantial evidence.
The model joint AME letter follows the same basic format of joint AME letters in non-AMA Guides cases. The
model AME joint letter includes language from Escobedo v. Marshalls [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604
(Appeals Board en banc opinion)], on apportionment of permanent impairment, along with additional language
from subsequent apportionment cases that requires physicians to discuss with reasonable medical probability
the reasons and rationale for their medical conclusions—i.e., to explain how and why other factors are causing
permanent impairments along with industrial exposures.
It is vital from an evidentiary standpoint that the evaluating physician in an AMA Guides case is aware of the
applicant’s contentions concerning how an industrial injury or injuries are being claimed (specific, continuous
trauma, compensable consequence, or combination) and which body part(s), function(s), or system(s) are
claimed to be permanently affected. It is also vital for an AME or PQME to be aware of the employer’s
contentions from a medical-legal standpoint, hopefully before the actual AME or PQME examination takes
place.
[4] Advocacy PQME Letters
The model PQME letter can be used if the PQME is agreed upon after the panel list was issued by the DWC
Medical Unit or if the PQME is the “last doctor standing” as a result of the PQME selection process mandated
under Labor Code § 4662.2.
Counsel can utilize the following model QME letter as a checklist for writing an advocacy letter to an evaluating
PQME or AME physician. All elements for a physician to write a medical-legal report that constitutes substantial
medical evidence are contained in these sample letters. It is also important to keep in mind the necessity for a
primary treating physician to also follow the criteria set forth below in writing an MMI report. Bear in mind from a
strategic standpoint, a PTP should review and comment upon the conclusions of a PQME and vice versa.
Judges like a fair fight where the winner wins because the medical evidence wholly supports that side’s legal
and medical position.
The PQME letter complies with the DWC mandate that only one PQME list be issued by the DWC Medical Unit
in one specialty in a case. Thus, if an applicant is claiming injuries to body parts, functions, or systems that are
outside the selected PQME’s medical specialty, the PQME may indicate that the applicant should be examined
by other specialists either through the employer’s Medical Provider Network as secondary consultative
physicians, or by additional panel QMEs. Pursuant to Labor Code §§ 4062.2(b) and (c), the DWC will not issue
multiple PQME lists in various specialties, unless and until parties either stipulate to an additional panel or a
judge orders additional panels based on good cause. Thus, if an applicant is claiming “ortho, psyche and
internal” injuries, only one PQME list in one medical specialty will be issued by the Medical Unit and the
selected PQME will examine the applicant in his or her own specialty. The DWC Medical Unit has agreed to
Page 4 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
issue multiple panel QME lists in different specialties if the parties stipulate to use more than one specialty or if
a WCJ orders it.
This is why it is essential that the parties indicate in an advocacy letter to the selected PQME what the applicant
is claiming, what is accepted or denied by the claims administrator, and what other medical specialties the
selected PQME should indicate the need for further QME evaluations or if the parties will utilize other means to
address issues that are outside the selected physician’s medical specialty. See 8 Cal. Code Reg. §§ 30–34 for
the procedures of selecting panel QME lists, additional panels, and replacement QME panels or individuals
within a QME panel.
Remember, the AMA Guides are compartmentalized in terms of medical conditions that result in impairments.
For example, an applicant may sustain a serious lumbar spine injury that results in nerve damage causing
neurogenic stress incontinence and loss of sexual functioning. The AMEs or PQMEs may have to be reminded
that each specialist should consult with specific chapters in the AMA Guides for an injury such as this. The
orthopedic surgeon of course will evaluate the case using the instructions, tables, and figures from Chapter 15,
The Spine, but a urologist who evaluates the stress incontinence and sexual dysfunction if caused by the
lumbar spine injury would consult with the corticospinal tract sections in Chapter 15 or the same tables for
urinary incontinence or sexual dysfunction due to central or peripheral nerve impairments in Chapter 13. (Note
that the stress incontinence and sexual dysfunction impairments would carry separate ratings in this case,
along with the rating from the lumbar spine impairment itself, with all ratings combined using the combined
values chart.)
[5] Required Elements in an AMA Compliant Medical Report
The following is a checklist that merges 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10682 and Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides, which
respectively list the requirements for medical reports that are offered into evidence in a medical-legal disputed
workers’ compensation case:
• Purpose of the examination (treating physician, AME, PQME, or QME)
• History of present illness
• Chief complaints
• Pre-injury and post-injury activities of daily living (Table 1-2 of AMA Guides)
• Past medical history
• Job description
• Review of submitted medical and legal records, including a list of items reviewed
• Physical examination (includes who and what methods used) and findings on examination
• Diagnostic and imaging study results
• Diagnosis and impression
• Discussion and conclusions
• Causation of the injury (specific injury, continuous trauma or both?)
• Has applicant reached maximum medical improvement and is permanent and stationary?
• Objective findings: loss of range of motion, neurological deficits by sensory deficits (pain, numbness,
loss of tactile discrimination, tingling) and motor function deficits (muscle weakness, atrophy),
spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, herniated intervertebral disc, nerve impingement, etc.
• Discussion of negative or positive diagnostic tests or imaging studies.
• Description of impairments for each separate part of body using specific chapters, tables, and page
numbers, and describing the method(s) of evaluation (DRE, ROM, both; DBE, functional loss,
anatomic loss; combining and adding there appropriate).
Page 5 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
• Are physician’s conclusions consistent with the 2005 PDRS and relevant case law?
• How does the industrial injury currently affect the applicant’s ADLs?
• Physician’s rationale for using a particular method of descriptions and measurements from the AMA
Guides.
• Causation of permanent impairments (apportionment), how and why other factors are causing
permanent disability in addition to industrial factors.
• Recommendations for further medical treatment. Note that in SB 863, Labor Code §§ 4061 and 4062
indicate that a panel QME or AME can determine injury AOE/COE, MMI status, permanent
impairment WPI ratings, apportionment, parts of body injured and whether or not the injured
employee needs future medical treatment. An AME or panel QME is not allowed to determine
medical necessity for treatment which is to be determined by utilization review pursuant to Labor
Code § 4610 and Independent Medical Review under new Labor Code § 4610.5. However, best
practices may include at least asking an AME or panel QME about specific future medical
treatment needs for setting reserves or establishing the amount for a proposed Workers’
Compensation Medicare Set-Aside agreement. This is a very important consideration. For
example, if a request for authorization for back surgery was denied by a timely utilization review
and upheld by Independent Medical Review and an AME or PQME later opines that back surgery
should be performed, that is new evidence that may constitute a change in circumstances that
would permit the primary treating physician to re-issue a new RFA for the back surgery since the
AME or PQME supports his or her request. This may cause a re-review of the RFA by a claims
examiner or a new utilization review process allowing for surgery to occur if it is consistent with the
Medical Treatment Utilization Schedule. This would avoid an injured worker from waiting 12
months for what was probably a reasonable and necessary surgery.
• Can the applicant perform his or her usual and customary job duties?
• What are the applicant’s residual functional capacities (listed in Form PR-4) and work restrictions?
• Does the impairment rating accurately reflect the effects of the industrial injury on the ability of the
Applicant to engage in work activities? Is the impairment rating disproportional or inequitable with
reference to the Applicant’s loss of future earning capacity due to the impairment? If so, what
impairment rating is more accurate and please describe how and why you arrived at the alternative
impairment rating.
While this section is devoted to giving counsel guidance in writing joint medical-legal letters to a QME or AME
medical-legal evaluator, it is important for counsel to see a model QME or AME report from the perspective of a
QME or AME. The following template is recommended by the California Orthopaedic Association (COA) for its
members who write medical-legal reports in California workers’ compensation cases. On the other side of the
model report template, the COA offers some additional guidelines for internal and psychiatric medical-legal
reports.
[6] Template for DWC Compliant Medical-Legal Reports for Musculoskeletal Evaluations Using the AMA
Guides
The template below was developed by orthopaedic surgeons who spent hours of their time in consultation with
each other and other policymakers on the development of this template. Counsel should refer to this template
as part of any preparation of an advocacy letter or joint QME or AME letter and prior to taking a doctor’s
deposition. The author would like to thank the leadership of the California Orthopaedic Association (COA), Paul
Wakim, D.O., and Peter Mandell, M.D. for their work in developing this template. The author also thanks Steve
Feinberg, M.D. for his contribution to this template.
California Orthopaedic
Association Medical-Legal
Page 6 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
Report Template
In an
effort to:
1) improve the ratability of Medical-Legal reports;
2) to help parties find information in your report; and
3) to ensure that you have addressed all the required
elements
While the Division of Workers’ Compensation (DWC) has not mandated the use of this template, COA
strongly recommends that you prepare your Medical-Legal Report in this order and with these topic
headings.
Put on your Letterhead
(Date of Report)
(List Names & Address/Fax/Email of Report Recipients)
Identifying Information Injured Worker (Consider identifying the IW via a photo or other ID)
RE:
(Name of Injured
Worker)
DOB:
(Date of birth of
Injured Worker)
DOI:
(Date of Injury(s))
EMP:
(Name of
Employer)
Claim
#:
(List Claim
Number(s))
WCA
B#:
(List WCAB
Number(s))
DOE:
(List Date of
Evaluation)
Dear (List Report Recipients):
Advocacy/Cover Letters
Acknowledge and note advocacy/cover letters received (date of letter and date received and issues you were
asked to address. If no letter was received, also note this in your report.
Location of Evaluation
List location/street address evaluation performed.
Include a statement that you informed the injured worker of their rights contained in CA Code of Regulations
§40. Disclosure Requirements: QME panel shall advise an injured worker prior to or at the time of the actual
evaluation that he or she is entitled to ask the evaluator and the evaluator shall promptly answer questions
about any matter concerning the evaluation process in which the QME and the injured worker are involved and
that
the
injured
worker
may
discontinue
the
evaluation
based
on
good
cause.
See
https://www.dir.ca.gov/t8/40.html
Evaluator Status
Identify your
status:
□ QME □ AME □ PTP □Other
□ “Regular” (IME) WCAB Judge ordered Exam
Individuals who Assisted in Preparation of Medical-Legal Report or Examination of Patient.
List anyone who helped (excluding interpreter or transcriber) in the preparation of the medical legal report or
examination of the injured worker (including records summarizer individual/company).
Page 7 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
List type of Medical-Legal Report – Comprehensive Medical-Legal Evaluation, Supplemental Medical-Legal
Evaluation, or Follow-up Medical-Legal Evaluation and Medical-Legal Code billed.
Face-to-Face Time with Injured Worker
List face-to-face time. MSK evaluations are required to spend a minimum of 30 minutes.
Number of Pages of Records Received/Reviewed
List # of pages, date records (medical and other records) were received, and who sent the records. Records
must be accompanied by a declaration from the party sending the records signed under penalty of perjury. If no
records were received or records were received without a declaration, note that the evaluation was performed
without the benefit of records. Do not review the records without the declaration as you likely won’t get paid for
review of the records. If the declaration is incorrect and lists the wrong number of pages sent, contact the party
who sent the records to get a corrected declaration before reviewing the records, otherwise you likely won’t get
paid for the additional pages.
State whether there were missing records of potential importance.
Several clarifications regarding records:
1. Regulation § 35(i) indicates the physician’s course of action if the records have not been received 10 days
after the date of the evaluation.
Regulation 35 (i)
In the event that a party fails to provide to the evaluator any relevant medical record which the evaluator deems
necessary to perform a comprehensive medical-legal evaluation, the evaluator may contact the treating
physician or other health care provider, to obtain such record(s). If the party fails to provide relevant medical
records within 10 days after the date of the evaluation, and the evaluator is unable to obtain the records, the
evaluator shall complete and serve the report to comply with the statutory time frames under section 38 of Title
8 of the California Code of Regulations. The evaluator shall note in the report that the records were not
received within the required time period. Upon request by a party, or the Appeals Board, the evaluator shall
complete a supplemental evaluation when the relevant medical records are received. For a supplemental report
the evaluator need not conduct an additional physical examination of the employee if the evaluator believes a
review of the additional records is sufficient.
The following language for your Medical-Legal report is suggested if records were not received within
10 days following the evaluation:
“Records were received but not reviewed. Per CA Code of Reg § 35(i) since the records were not received
within 10 days after the evaluation, if you want me to review the records, please send a request for a
supplemental report. (If records were received with no Declaration, add – Please also send the required
Declaration which includes the number of pages of records sent.)”
2. A summary of the records from one of the parties/attorneys cannot be relied upon by the QME. A QME
cannot comply with relevant portions of the Labor Code and the California Code of Regulations by reviewing
only a summary of records in preparing the medical-legal report. Pursuant to the provisions of Labor Code
§ 4628(a)(2) and regulation § 41(c)(2), the physician must actually review all available records as part of the
medical-legal evaluation and/or the preparation of the medical-legal report.
List other individuals present during the evaluation
• Family, friend, other
• Interpreter/Transcriber (list Name, Language, and License #)
• Nurse Case Manager – with agreement of injured worker
Page 8 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
Information on Injured Worker
• Age; marital status, handedness, gender. job title
• Employer: Start date:
Current work status: □ off work  □ working modified  □ working full duty
• List/describe any concurrent or subsequent employment dates (including employer, hours per week and
job duties)
• Include employment history – for at least the last 10 years
Job description
Include job description as described by the patient and any received from defendant – note differences.
History of Injury
Describe injury as related by injured worker and contrast with advocacy letters and/or medical records.
Pertinent Records Summary
Summarize:
• History of relevant/pertinent pre-existing injuries/illnesses.
• History of industrial injury you are being asked to evaluate per medical records contrasted with patient’s
recollection.
• History of subsequent medical care from the subject industrial injury and other pertinent history.
Current Treatment & Names of Treaters
List current treatment and names of treating health care professionals.
Personal and Social History
• Social Situation
• Place of Birth
• Childhood: normal or dysfunctional (note any history of adverse childhood experiences (ACEs))
• Significant other condition
• Children
• Living situation/arrangement/accessibility
• Education (note if illiterate):
• Military service
• Recreation (prior to injury and current)
• Habits:
◦ Caffeine:
◦ Alcohol:
◦ Tobacco:
◦ Marijuana:
• Incarceration history
• Illicit substance use (current & past)
• Income (previous)
Page 9 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
• Current Source of income: (family members, Workers’ Compensation, pension, Long-Term Disability,
State Disability, Social Security, etc.)
Past Medical History
• Diseases
• Illnesses
• Surgeries
• Present Medications – current and past medications – both prescription and over-the-counter (vitamins,
supplements, herbals, THC, etc.) including dosage and number taken per day, efficacy, and any side
effects of past and current medications.
• Allergies
• Psychiatric
• Injuries (including childhood, adult, military, etc.)
• Previous Accidents (include auto)
• Hospitalizations
Family Medical History:
Medical including any alcoholism, substance abuse, major injuries, disability, chronic pain issues, etc.
Pending Claims/Lawsuits
Present/Current Symptoms/Complaints
• Both by specific body part and overall including radiation of symptoms with spatial characteristics, duration
periodicity, and intensity/severity.
• Functional: Interference/Changes in Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) & work ability.
• Pain: Character and quality; provocative/aggravating or palliative/alleviating factors
• Daily Routine (including change from preinjury): Exercise, outdoor activities, recreation, household chores,
etc.
• Bowel/Bladder/Sexual functioning
• Mental & Emotional: Changes in cognition/concentration and/or emotional state (depression, anxiety, etc.)
Review of Systems:
Physical Examination (performed using AMA Guides 5th protocols) (Female exam should include the
presence of a same gender assistant.) Exam should only include body parts requested. If there is a body
part/condition that is part of the industrial injury that is beyond your typical scope of practice, such problems
should be addressed by a QME/AME in the appropriate specialty.
Patient descriptors: pleasant & cooperative; good or poor historian, etc.
• General observations: Appearance and constitution; adaptive aids (braces, cane, wheelchair, etc.)
• Pain behavior/observations of physical functioning (note nonphysiologically findings)
• Orthopaedic Examination -appropriate to evaluation. (ROM, girths, deformity, joint laxity/stability,
tenderness, alignment, etc.)
Lumbosacral Spine/Lower Extremity in case of loss of limb or short leg or atrophy
Cervical Spine/Upper Extremity in case of loss of limb or short leg or atrophy Lower Extremities –
including measurements
Page 10 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
Upper Extremities – including measurements
• Neck
• Provocative tests
• Neurologic
◦ Assessment of level of consciousness and mental status, thought processes and content, speech,
and communication/language
◦ Cranial nerves
◦ Strength
◦ Sensation
◦ Sphincter tone and superficial reflexes – limited to people who may have Cauda Equina Syndrome
and should not be performed on routine neurological exams.
◦ Deep tendon reflexes (DTR) including pathologic reflexes
◦ Coordination
List of Records/Information Received/Reviewed/Relied upon
Include date of medical record, a description of the record, including review of X-rays.
Discussion/Causation
• Diagnoses/Impression/Assessment Objecting Findings
Does the diagnosis appear consistent with examination and medical history?
• Diagnostic and laboratory testing results related to this evaluation
• Document any Medical or Other Research performed with explanation and references
• Should also address any specific (beyond the standard) questions raised by either party.
• Report should meet the threshold of Substantial Medical Evidence. (See definition of Substantial
Medical Evidence included at the end of this document.)
You must explain the how and the why of your conclusions
• Causation of Injury - remember, injury occurring in the course of employment (COE) is deferred to the trier
of fact whereas injury arising out of employment (AOE) is a physician decision. Include a discussion of
subjective and objective factors of disability.
Note: If medical records and employee description differ, while contemporaneous records are assumed
to be more accurate (per Evidence Code), determination must be two-fold:
◦ Based on employee history; and,
◦ Based on record information (absent actual film of the incident).
Disability Status/Work Restrictions/Limitations:
Provide an opinion as to the nature, extent, and duration of disability and work limitations (if any) explain
rationale for opinion.
□ Can work regular duty □ Cannot work regular duty (explain rationale for opinion)
Impairment Rating
The impairment rating should be determined using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
– 5th Edition unless the Almaraz-Guzman comparative rating is more applicable.
Page 11 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
You must discuss and give your rationale as to why you selected one or the other option.
Apportionment = causation of disability Labor Code Sections 4663 and 4664
For a discussion of important case law and when and how to apply the case, refer to the “Discussion of
Important Terms/Concepts” at the end of this document.
• Using the AMA Guides 5th Edition Impairment Rating (with clear documentation of the process used to
derive the rating)
• Standard Approach and
• Almaraz Guzman Analysis
Put both the standard approach rating and an analysis under Almaraz-Guzman in your report.
• Statement that the most accurate impairment rating has been provided.
• Address adding versus combining with the CVC Table.
If Psyche injury, percent of total causation resulting from actual events at work Rolda analysis in the
causation for psych/stress injuries.
Statement that all the opinions/conclusions within are based on a reasonable medical probability.
Vocational Rehabilitation / Educational Voucher
If Permanent & Stationary (P&S), complete Physician’s Return-to-Work and Voucher Report
□ MMI/P&S (list date) and/or  □ TD (Temporary Disability – list dates of TD)
• Explain the rationale for opinion particularly if it disagrees with the PTP or other evaluators.
• List a rationale specific P&S date.
• List specific dates/periods of temporary disability.
Future Medical Care and Treatment:
□ Yes  □ No (with recommendations)
Summarize recommended future medical treatment and whether the injured worker has reached Maximum
Medical Improvement (MMI). Was there a finding of permanent disability?
Closing Required Affidavits and Disclosures
Statement that the physician did not violate Labor Code § 139.3 (self-referral)
https://law.justia.com/codes/california/2011/lab/division-1/110-139.6/139.3/
Sample language:
Please be informed that I personally obtained from the patient the history of injury, conducted the
examination, reviewed the provided medical records and prepared and dictated this report.
In accordance with Labor Code 4628, I declare under penalty of perjury that the information contained in
this report and its attachments, if any, is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief, except as
to information I have indicated I have received from others. As to that information, I declare under penalty
of perjury that the information accurately describes the information provided to me and, except as noted
herein, that I believe it to be true.
I have not violated Labor Code Section 139.3, and the contents of this report and bill are true and correct to
the best of my knowledge. This statement is made under penalty of perjury.
This report has been transcribed, edited and printed by (name of transcriptionist) and was thoroughly read
prior to my signature.
Date of Report:
City and County Where Report Was Signed
Page 12 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
Signature of physician
Proof of Service
cc: Copies to appropriate parties
Discussion of Important Terms/Concepts
Permanent & Stationary (P&S) / Maximal Medical Improvement (MMI)
“Permanent and stationary status” is the point when the employee has reached maximal medical improvement,
meaning his or her condition is well stabilized, and unlikely to change substantially in the next year with or
without medical treatment. See https://www.dir.ca.gov/t8/9785.html
Permanent and stationary means the same thing as maximum medical improvement.
Reaching permanent and stationary status suggests that a condition has stabilized (or even resolved/cured)
and there will probably not be major improvement with ongoing medical care. In many cases, a future medical
award will be included to cover ongoing treatment. There may be fluctuations in symptoms and also flareups
deserving increased medical attention. If the condition and disability worsen over time, within 5 years of the
P&S date, the injured worker may file for New & Further Disability which would lead to reconsideration
regarding the disability and the impairment by the medical legal evaluator.
Substantial Medical Evidence
The analysis of what constitutes substantial medical evidence has a sequential analysis and is best described
in Part II.E. of the California Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board (WCAB) en banc decision Escobedo v.
Marshalls [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604, 620-621]:
https://www.dir.ca.gov/WCAB/2005-EB-4.pdf
1. [I]n order to constitute substantial evidence, a medical opinion must be predicated on reasonable medical
probability (> 50% i.e., more likely than not).
2. [A] medical opinion is not substantial evidence if it is based on facts no longer germane, on inadequate
medical histories or examinations, on incorrect legal theories, or on surmise, speculation, conjecture,
or guess.
3. [A] medical report is not substantial evidence unless it sets forth the reasoning behind the physician’s
opinion, not merely his or her conclusions.
4. [A] medical opinion must be framed in terms of reasonable medical probability, it must not be
speculative, it must be based on pertinent facts and on an adequate examination and history, and it
must set forth reasoning in support of its conclusions.
Substantial medical evidence means “more than a mere scintilla. It means such relevant evidence as a
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.” Richardson v. Perales, 402 U.S. 389, 401
(1971). https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/402/389/
The physician’s medical opinion must set forth the how and why and the facts and reasoning (not just his or
her conclusions/opinions) that justify the opinion.
Key Elements of an expert’s opinion that ensure that it rises to the level of substantial evidence:
1. Expert’s testimony or opinion must involve matters beyond common experience.
2. Expert’s opinion must be based on assumptions of fact supported by the evidence.
3. The assumptions of fact must be the type that are reasonably relied upon by other experts.
4. The controlling factors relied upon by the expert cannot be based on conjecture or speculation.
Page 13 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
5. The expert must display a familiarity with the appropriate legal theory to be applied to the facts of the
case.
6. The expert must relate the reasoning by which they progress from their material to their conclusion. This
would be the how and why.
Causation of (Industrial) Injury
An injured worker has the burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that an injury is work
related. Work activities need not be the sole cause of the injury or even the primary cause. Except in psychiatric
cases, it is sufficient that the employment contributed to the injury to a significant degree.
The question of whether an injury is work related is divided into two parts (Labor Code § 3600):
• Did the injury “arise out of employment” (AOE)?
• Did the injury “occur in the course of employment” (COE)?
Because the physician provides direct evidence on whether and how the activities of work led to the current
injury, the physician answers the question of whether the injury arose out of employment (AOE).
The question of whether an injury occurred in the course of employment is not a medical question because it
involves the circumstances of the accident or exposure. If COE is in dispute, a workers’ compensation judge
will decide the issue based on evidence offered by the employee, the employer, or other witnesses and on legal
precedents.
Apportionment
Apportionment in California is about parceling out all the industrial and nonindustrial contributing-causal
factors of the injured worker’s permanent disability once the injured worker is at maximal medical improvement
(MMI) / permanent and stationary (P&S).
Apportionment is based on California Labor Code Section 4663 and 4664.
When considering apportionment, the following are three critical portions or provisions of Labor Code Section
4663: https://california.public.law/codes/ca_lab_code_section_4663
a) Apportionment of permanent disability shall be based on causation.
b) A physician who prepares a report addressing the issue of permanent disability due to a claimed
industrial injury shall in that report address the issue of causation of the permanent disability.
c) In order for a physician’s report to be considered complete on the issue of permanent disability, the
report shall include an apportionment determination. A physician shall make an apportionment
determination by finding what approximate percentage of the permanent disability that was caused by
the direct result of injury arising out of and occurring in the course of employment and what
approximate percent- age of the permanent disability was caused by other factors both before and
subsequent to the industrial injury, including prior industrial injuries….
California Labor Code 4664 https://california.public.law/codes/ca_lab_code_section_4664 states the following:
In Escobedo (2005) 70 CCC 604, the WCAB basically provided an analytical roadmap as to the construction
and application of the apportionment statutes.
A physician preparing a medicolegal report is tasked in part to determine apportionment of the disability arising
from the specific and/or cumulative industrial injury(ies) in question but also to prior or subsequent injuries or
illnesses and nonindustrial contributing-causal factors that are the contributing cause of the disability. Those
nonindustrial contributing-causal factors may include asymptomatic conditions or underlying pathology that may
or may not have been known or causing symptoms or disability prior to or at the time of the industrial injury. The
key inquiry for the reporting physician is to determine whether any underlying pathology or previously
asymptomatic conditions are contributing-causal factor(s) of the applicant’s current permanent disability.
In essence, the purpose of apportionment is to limit the employer’s liability to the percentage of actual
permanent disability caused by the current industrial injury(ies), not to determine what the level of permanent
disability would have been absent the nonindustrial cause.
Page 14 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
It is not enough to know the etiology or cause of a particular underlying nonindustrial pathology (congenital,
developmental, genetic, heredity, etc.), or asymptomatic condition, but rather what approximate percentage the
extent or severity of the pathology or disease process itself (confirmed by diagnostic studies and supported by
substantial evidence) is a present contributing-causal factor of the injured worker’s permanent disability at the
time of MMI status for each and every body part or condition at issue.
There are certain impermissible, invalid, and potentially unlawful nonindustrial contributing- causal factors of
permanent disability that should not be used to establish nonindustrial apportionment. These impermissible and
potentially unlawful factors would include, but are not necessarily limited to, age alone and gender alone.
While it is impermissible to apportion solely to age or gender specifically, the physician can apportion to
degenerative changes (assuming they are a contributing-causal factor of the permanent disability).
The physician is not to apportion to a condition or a risk factor (e.g., diabetes, degenerative disease, or a
genetic condition) just because it exists, but only if the physician can articulate that the underlying condition or
pathology is an actual contributing-causal factor of the applicant’s permanent disability.
How do we then decide to apportion in a way that is not speculative and meets the standard of substantial
medical evidence? How do we decide with any particular injured worker that something else other than work is
contributing to the disability? The answer is that each physician must provide his or her best opinion based on
reasonable medical probability and defend that opinion using substantial medical evidence.
Questions or issues for every evaluating physician to consider:
• What is the nature of the injury?
• What are the person’s job duties?
• What factors activities outside of the work injury or exposure may be a contributing-causal factor of the
resultant permanent disability at the time of the MMI evaluation?
• What prior and subsequent injuries has the applicant sustained, both on an industrial and nonindustrial
basis?
In summary, apportionment refers to parceling out all the contributing-causal factors both industrial and
nonindustrial of the resultant permanent disability. This would he follow-up Simply put, what approximate
percentage of the permanent disability was caused by the work injury or industrial exposure, and what
approximate percentage was caused by other nonindustrial contributing-causal factors. Those contributing-
causal factors, whatever they might be, may not have been known or even labor disabling previously, but if they
are contributing-causal factors of the permanent disability, apportionment is required.
Adding versus Combining Using the CVC Table
Definitions:
• OVERLAP: Combined effect (ADL loss) of the body parts less than the sum of their separate effects.
• SYNERGY: Combined effect (ADL loss) of the body parts greater than the sum of their separate effects.
There are two Methods to rebut the CVC (i.e., add rather than combine). That opinion MUST provide a rationale
and meet the threshold of substantial medical evidence.
1. There are multiple impairments that have no overlap on ADLs. This is not about body parts (psyche v
heart v. spine) but about ADLs! There does NOT have to be synergy to meet this threshold.
2. There are overlapping ADLs which are synergistic, and the separate impairments have an amplifying
effect.
With all that said, case law has evolved since Kite, it is currently more about accuracy: Does the WPI correlate
with the disability (ADL deficits)? Have you provided the most accurate impairment rating?
REFERENCES & EDUCATIONAL INFORMATION
Page 15 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
1. State of California Department of Industrial Relations Division of Workers’ Compensation
Physician’s Guide to Medical Practice in the California Workers’ Compensation System Fourth
Edition, 2016 https://www.dir.ca.gov/dwc/medicalunit/toc.pdf
2. QME
Competency
Examination
Information
Booklet
https://www.dir.ca.gov/dwc/medicalunit/QMEInformationBooklet.pdf
3. DWC
Physician
Education:
Qualified
Medical
Evaluators
(QME)
https://www.dir.ca.gov/dwc/CaliforniaDWCCME.htm
4. Apportionment: Case Law Outline Focusing On Evolving Themes, Trends, And Problem Areas ,
Raymond F. Correio, January, 2020 http://pbw-law.com/resources/educational-materials.html
© Copyright 2021 California Orthopaedic Association. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
[7] Templates for Letters
[a] In General
As noted above, AMEs and QMEs routinely receive joint letters from attorneys and claim administrators
outlining their requests for narrative reports and in some cases describing agreed facts and issues for the
physician to address. Traditionally, these letters were boilerplate letters, and few physicians paid any
attention to them.
Under the AMA Guides, the cases and medical-legal issues are much more complex, especially in light of
the case law on apportionment. There is also more uncertainty in some cases as to which method of rating
permanent impairment is determined using the AMA Guides.
The following templates of joint or advocacy AME and QME letters are suggested to legal counsel and
claims administrators to focus attention on the specific medical and legal issues that are unique to a case.
QMEs and AMEs do pay close attention to these letters as counsel and claims administrators are being
asked to send specific letters to physicians outlining their agreed and disputed facts and requesting the
physician to address specific issues. A physician’s review of these templates in this section will familiarize
the doctor with the level of information that should be shared with the QME or AME in these cases. The
exchange of information between the parties and the AME or QME will avoid unnecessary delay in
resolving these cases and will reduce the need for many supplemental reports when the issues set forth by
the parties are clear to the physician in the first place.
It is strongly suggested that parties send an AME or QME one letter where agreed-upon facts are described
and disputed ones are also inserted into the letter, written by each party and approved in advance by
agreement or by judicial order. It works better for all parties when agreed facts are stated and the joint letter
goes on to state each side’s contentions on disputed issues. For example, applicant’s counsel would insert
the following: “The Applicant contends that injurious exposure to her bilateral hands, wrists, and low back
occurred in this case by the Applicant’s spending six hours a day typing on a computer keyboard while
sitting in uncomfortable chairs.” The defense attorney would write: “Defendant contends that this is a denied
post-termination CT case, where there was no evidence of treatment to the alleged body parts prior to her
termination from employment, no report of injury to her supervisor or Human Resources department of her
employer, and no evidence she had any physical complaints.”
Joint “advocacy” letters like these are rare since unfortunately they require a significant amount of
cooperation between the parties and time to write the letters specific to a case. Experience shows that
taking the time to write a joint advocacy letter is worth it. Physicians have uniformly indicated during their
QME recertification classes that they prefer joint letters that discuss both sides’ contentions with citations to
the records—legal and medical.
[b] Model Joint AME Letter Pursuant to Labor Code Section 4062.2
Page 16 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
Dear Dr.:
You have been selected by the parties to act as the agreed medical examiner in accordance with Labor
Code § 4062.2 in the above-captioned workers’ compensation claim. Please note that the examination of
the applicant is scheduled in your office as follows:
Date:
Time:
In this case, [state the applicant’s allegations from the Application(s) for Adjudication of Claim, e.g.: the
applicant has alleged injuries on a continuous trauma basis with orthopedic injuries, internal medical
conditions, and injuries to his psyche, nerves, and emotional system pursuant to the Applications for
Adjudication of Claims filed in this matter.] The parties may refer the applicant to either agreed or qualified
medical examiners in specialties other than your medical specialty for evaluation of this case.
It is respectfully requested that you perform your usual thorough medical examination, within your medical
specialty, taking all necessary tests with the exception of those requiring hospitalization, which would
require further advanced authorization by the persons signing this joint letter. The parties are enclosing
copies of the legal documents in this case, including the claim form(s), Application(s) for Adjudication of
Claim, deposition transcript(s), and medical reports and records, including those subpoenaed by the parties
for your review and commentary. We are including an index of items being sent to you for your review.
Upon completion of your evaluation of this case, please return the documents to the respective office that
sent the documents to you for your review. We are also enclosing a Declaration attesting to the number of
pages of records you are requested to review in this matter. We have taken steps to avoid duplication of
records for you to review and if there are duplicates please let us know in your report.
Please take a history from the applicant and review the entire medical and legal file forwarded by the
parties hereto, including any diagnostic and imaging studies. Your report should include your objective
opinion regarding diagnosis, industrial causation, non-industrial causation, prognosis, periods of temporary
total disability, if any, nature and extent of any permanent impairment, need for further medical treatment,
apportionment of permanent disability, the applicant’s residual functional capacity, and whether the
applicant can return to his or her usual and customary occupation.
In supplying the parties with your medical report, please respond to the following specific interrogatories:
1. Did the applicant sustain an industrially related injury either as a result of a specific injury, continuous
trauma, or both?
2. Was (Is) the applicant temporarily totally disabled on an industrial basis? If so, please indicate all
reasonable periods of such disability.
3. Does the applicant have any permanent impairment utilizing the descriptions and measurements in the
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition that is attributable to the alleged
industrial injuries? If so, when did the condition become permanent and stationary and the applicant
reached maximum medical improvement?
[Include the following paragraph if the case involves injury to the spine:]
4. Since this claim involves the applicant’s spine, please evaluate this case utilizing both the DRE and
Range of Motion methods of evaluating spinal impairments under Chapter 15 of the AMA Guides and
indicate to the parties which method you believe most accurately reflects this applicant’s spinal
impairment(s), if any. If you utilize a diagnosis related estimate for a spinal WPI rating, please indicate
which class of DRE applies in this case and what percentage of WPI within that class applies. Please state
the rationale for your conclusions, how and why the applicant meets a specific class of impairment and
percentage of WPI within that class.
[Include the following paragraph if the case involves injury to the heart and hypertension:]
5. Since this claim involves the applicant’s coronary heart disease or arrhythmia and hypertension, please
evaluate this case utilizing both Chapters 3 and 4 of the AMA Guides and indicate to the parties which
Tables and/or Figures you rely on in coming to your conclusions about the applicant’s permanent
impairment(s), if any. Please state what, if any, impairment class applies in this case under a specific
Page 17 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
Table(s) and what WPI percentage, if any, applies. Please state the rationale for your conclusions, how and
why the applicant meets a specific class of impairment and percentage of WPI within that class.
[Include any other relevant references to specific chapters or instructions in the AMA Guides that the
parties agree may apply in a case.]
6. Please state if and how the applicant’s medical conditions that are industrially related, affect the
applicant’s activities of daily living as that term is defined in Chapter 1, Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA
Guides. Please note that if you believe the applicant has a pain-related impairment that is greater than
expected from the WPI rating that exists in this case, you may add up to 3% WPI for pain-related
impairments for all injuries and parts of body injured. You can assess up to a maximum 3% WPI pain-
related impairment spread among existing WPI ratings for the underlying medical conditions.
7. Please state if and how the applicant’s impairment impacts his or her ability to perform work activities.
Please indicate whether the impairment rating you assign based on the AMA Guides accurately describes
the effect of the impairment on the applicant’s ability to perform ADL and work activities and, if not, how and
why the rating is inaccurate. Please indicate how and why you arrived at an alternative impairment rating
and why you conclude it is more accurate.
8. Is the applicant in need of any future medical treatment? If so, please specify the type and frequency of
such care.
9. Does the applicant suffer from a serious chronic condition, needs surgery within the next 180 days, or is
recently recovering from surgery as those terms are used and defined in AD Rule 9767.9?
10. Is there any apportionment of permanent impairment in accordance with Labor Code § 4663 or 4664?
Please indicate with reasonable medical probability approximately what percentage of permanent
impairment is directly caused by the industrial injuries and what approximate percentage of permanent
impairment is caused by other factors such as pathology, prior or subsequent non-industrial injuries, prior
asymptomatic conditions, or retroactive prophylactic restrictions. If there is any apportionment to other
factors, please state your rationale for your conclusions, including how and why apportionment of
permanent disability can be attributed to other factors besides the industrial injuries.
11. Has the applicant self-procured any medical treatment for the condition(s) in issue? If so, please
provide your opinion with respect to the reasonableness and necessity of such self-procured treatment to
cure or relieve from the effects of any industrial injuries.
12. Is the applicant able to return to his or her usual and customary work duties? If not, please indicate the
applicant’s residual functional capacities or permanent work restrictions. If the applicant is MMI, please
include the “Physician’s Return To Work and Voucher Report” DWC-AD From 10133.36.
13. Please indicate whether the applicant suffers from any sleep disorder, sexual dysfunction or psychiatric
condition that is caused by the physical injury and whether medical treatment on an industrial basis should
be provided for any of these conditions, and whether or not any of these conditions caused any additional
periods of temporary partial or temporary total disability.
Because you have been chosen by both parties to perform this medical-legal evaluation, it would be
improper for any party hereto to have any contact with your office in any regard. Therefore, should you
desire further information, please communicate by letter with a copy to all parties. In your report, please
disclose the names of all persons other than yourself who perform any and all diagnostic tests and/or
measurements that you request as a part of your examination.
Once your examination and report are completed, please forward your original report and one copy to one
of the following parties with a copy to all other parties listed below. Please note that current regulations
require that you send copies of your report at the same time to the injured worker, the claims administrator,
and the attorneys for the injured worker and claims administrator, if any. The original report will be filed at
the WCAB by the party who receives the original from your office. Also, please enclose a copy of your
itemized statement and disclosure forms with your original and copies as follows:
Applicant, [Name, address]
Law Offices of
Attorneys for Applicant
Page 18 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
Law Offices of
Attorneys for Defendant
Thank you for your kind assistance in resolving the medical issues in this case and please be sure to notify
the parties either by letter or by fax if you have any questions concerning this matter.
Very truly yours,
[Print name here], Esq.
Very truly yours,
[Print name here], Esq.
[c] Model Joint or Advocacy Panel QME Letter Pursuant to Labor Code Section 4062.2
Dear Dr.:
You have been selected by the parties to act as the [agreed] panel QME in accordance with Labor Code
§ 4062.2 in the above-captioned workers’ compensation claim. Please note that the examination of the
applicant is scheduled in your office as follows:
Date:
Time:
If you believe the applicant should be evaluated by a physician in a different specialty other than for which
you are qualified, please notify the parties in writing.
In this case, [state the applicant’s allegations from the Application(s) for Adjudication of Claim, e.g.: the
applicant, a clerk-typist employed for 5 years at this employer has alleged injuries on a continuous trauma
basis with orthopedic injuries to his spine and both hands and wrists; hypertension and injuries to his
psyche, nerves, and emotional system pursuant to the Application for Adjudication of Claim filed in this
matter]. The employer [or claims administrator] has denied the injury as this is a post-termination case and
there was no prior report of injuries to the employer and no evidence of treatment prior to the date of the
Applicant’s termination of employment.
It is respectfully requested that you perform your usual thorough medical examination, within your medical
specialty, taking all necessary tests with the exception of those requiring hospitalization, which would
require further advanced authorization by the persons signing this joint letter. The parties are enclosing
copies of the legal documents in this case, including the claim form(s), Application(s) for Adjudication of
Claim, deposition transcript(s), and medical reports and records, including those subpoenaed by the parties
for your review and commentary. We are including an index of items being sent to you for your review.
Upon completion of your evaluation of this case, please return the documents to the respective office that
sent the documents to you for your review. We are also enclosing a Declaration attesting to the number of
pages of records you are requested to review in this matter. We have taken steps to avoid duplication of
records for you to review and if there are duplicates please let us know in your report.
Please take a history from the applicant and review the entire medical and legal file forwarded by the
parties hereto, including any diagnostic and imaging studies. Your report should include your objective
opinion regarding diagnosis, industrial causation, non-industrial causation, prognosis, periods of temporary
total disability, if any, nature and extent of any permanent impairment, need for further medical treatment,
apportionment of permanent disability, the applicant’s residual functional capacity, and whether the
applicant can return to his or her usual and customary occupation.
In supplying the parties with your medical report, please respond to the following specific interrogatories:
1. Did the applicant sustain an industrially related injury either as a result of a specific injury, continuous
trauma, or both?
2. Was (Is) the applicant temporarily totally disabled on an industrial basis? If so, please indicate all
reasonable periods of such disability.
3. Does the applicant have any permanent impairment utilizing the descriptions and measurements in the
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition that is attributable to the alleged
Page 19 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
industrial injuries? If so, when did the condition become permanent and stationary and the applicant
reached maximum medical improvement?
[Include the following paragraph if the case involves injury to the spine:]
4. Since this claim involves the applicant’s spine, please evaluate this case utilizing both the DRE and
Range of Motion methods of evaluating spinal impairments under Chapter 15 of the AMA Guides and
indicate to the parties which method you believe most accurately reflects this applicant’s spinal
impairment(s), if any. If you utilize a diagnosis related estimate for a spinal WPI rating, please indicate
which class of DRE applies in this case and what percentage of WPI within that class applies. Please state
the rationale for your conclusions, how and why the applicant meets a specific class of impairment and
percentage of WPI within that class.
[Include the following paragraph if the case involves injury to the heart and hypertension:]
5. Since this claim involves the applicant’s coronary heart disease or arrhythmia and hypertension, please
evaluate this case utilizing both Chapters 3 and 4 of the AMA Guides and indicate to the parties which
Tables and/or Figures you rely on in coming to your conclusions about the applicant’s permanent
impairment(s), if any. Please state what, if any, impairment class applies in this case under a specific
Table(s) and what WPI percentage, if any, applies. Please state the rationale for your conclusions, how and
why the applicant meets a specific class of impairment and percentage of WPI within that class.
[Include any other relevant references to specific chapters or instructions in the AMA Guides that the
parties agree may apply in a case.]
6. Please state if and how the applicant’s medical conditions that are industrially related, affect the
applicant’s activities of daily living as that term is defined in Chapter 1, Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA
Guides. Please note that if you believe the applicant has a pain-related impairment that is greater than
expected from the WPI rating that exists in this case, you may add up to 3% WPI for pain-related
impairments for all injuries and parts of body injured. You can assess up to a maximum 3% WPI pain-
related impairment spread among existing WPI ratings for the underlying medical conditions.
7. Please state if and how the applicant’s impairment impacts his or her ability to perform work activities.
Please indicate whether the impairment rating you assign based on the AMA Guides accurately describes
the effect of the impairment on the applicant’s ability to perform ADL and work activities and, if not, how and
why the rating is inaccurate. Please indicate how and why you arrived at an alternative impairment rating,
and why you conclude it is more accurate.
8. Is the applicant in need of any future medical treatment? If so, please specify the type and frequency of
such care.
9. Please resolve any disputed medical treatment recommendations that have been denied or modified by
the employer’s utilization review process. Please review any written utilization review denial or modification
notices that are included in the documents the parties sent to you and comment upon the current medical
necessity for those modalities. In addition, please indicate the type of medication, physical therapy or other
treatment modalities that you currently recommend and state what evidence-based medical treatment
utilization schedule or nationally accepted protocols you are relying on to justify the recommendations.
10. Does the applicant suffer from a serious chronic condition, needs surgery within the next 180 days, or is
recently recovering from surgery as those terms are used and defined in AD Rule 9767.9?
11. Is there any apportionment of permanent impairment in accordance with Labor Code § 4663 or 4664?
Please indicate with reasonable medical probability approximately what percentage of permanent
impairment is directly caused by the industrial injuries and what approximate percentage of permanent
impairment is caused by other factors such as pathology, prior or subsequent non-industrial injuries, prior
asymptomatic conditions, or retroactive prophylactic restrictions. If there is any apportionment to other
factors, please state your rationale for your conclusions, including how and why apportionment of
permanent disability can be attributed to other factors besides the industrial injuries.
12. Has the applicant self-procured any medical treatment for the condition(s) in issue? If so, please
provide your opinion with respect to the reasonableness and necessity of such self-procured treatment to
cure or relieve from the effects of any industrial injuries.
Page 20 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
13. Is the applicant able to return to his or her usual and customary work duties? If not, please indicate the
applicant’s residual functional capacities or permanent work restrictions. If the applicant is MMI, please
include the “Physician’s Return To Work and Voucher Report” DWC-AD From 10133.36.
14. Please indicate whether the applicant suffers from any sleep disorder, sexual dysfunction or psychiatric
condition that is caused by the physical injury and whether medical treatment on an industrial basis should
be provided for any of these conditions, and whether or not any of these conditions caused any additional
periods of temporary partial or temporary total disability.
Because you have been chosen by both parties to perform this medical-legal evaluation, it would be
improper for any party hereto to have any contact with your office in any regard. Therefore, should you
desire further information, please communicate by letter with a copy to all parties. In your report, please
disclose the names of all persons other than yourself who perform any and all diagnostic tests and/or
measurements that you request as a part of your examination.
Please note that as a panel QME, you have 30 days to submit your initial medical-legal panel QME report
to the parties, unless you request in writing a 15-day extension of time from the Division of Workers’
Compensation Medical Unit. Your failure to comply with these and other regulations could result in your
report being stricken from the legal record, and you may not receive payment for your services.
Once your examination and report are completed, please forward your original report and one copy to one
of the following parties with a copy to all other parties listed below. Please note that current regulations
require that you send copies of your report at the same time to the injured worker, the claims administrator,
and the attorneys for the injured worker and claims administrator, if any. The original report will be filed at
the WCAB by the party who receives the original from your office. Also, please enclose a copy of your
itemized statement and disclosure forms with your original and copies as follows:
Applicant, [Name, address]
Law Offices of
Attorneys for Applicant
Law Offices of
Attorneys for Defendant
Thank you for your kind assistance in resolving the medical issues in this case and please be sure to notify
the parties either by letter or by fax as to other qualified medical evaluators you recommend in this case for
medical conditions that are outside your specialty.
Very truly yours,
[Print name here], Esq.
Very truly yours,
[Print name here], Esq.
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 21 of 21
§ 2.07 Model AME and Panel QME Advocacy Letters
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp CHAPTER 3.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
CHAPTER 3 AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.01  Introduction
§ 3.02  AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
§ 3.03  AMA Guides Chapter 2: Practical Application of the Guides
§ 3.04  AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta; Chapter 4: The
Cardiovascular System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
§ 3.05  AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
§ 3.06  AMA Guides Chapter 6: The Digestive System
§ 3.07  AMA Guides Chapter 7: The Urinary and Reproductive System
§ 3.08  AMA Guides Chapter 8: The Skin
§ 3.09  AMA Guides Chapter 9: The Hematopoietic System
§ 3.10  AMA Guides Chapter 10: The Endocrine System
§ 3.11  AMA Guides Chapter 11: Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures
§ 3.12  AMA Guides Chapter 12: The Visual System
§ 3.13  AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
§ 3.14  AMA Guides Chapter 14: Mental and Behavioral Disorders
§ 3.15  AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
[1]  Discussion and Analysis
[2]  Checklist for Compliance of Medical Report on Spinal Injuries
[3]  The “DRE Gap”
[4]  Other Medical-Legal Issues in Spinal Injury Cases
§ 3.16  AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
[1]  Overview
Page 2 of 3
Synopsis to CHAPTER 3 : AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
[2]  ROM Measurements
[a]  In General
[b]  How to Read and Understand a Pie Chart
[3]  Peripheral Nerve Disorders
[4]  Digital and Hand Impairments
[a]  In General
[b]  Loss of Range of Motion
[5]  Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
[6]  Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
[7]  Vascular Disorders
[8]  “Other Disorders”
[a]  In General
[b]  Bone and Joint Deformities
[c]  Resection Arthroplasty
[d]  Constrictive Tenosynovitis (Trigger Fingers)
[e]  Muscle Strength Loss
[9]  Combining Upper Extremity Ratings for the Same Part of Body
[10]  Checklist for Evaluating Upper Extremity Impairments
[11]  FEC Adjustments
§ 3.17  AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
[1]  Overview
[2]  13 Methods of Evaluation
[3]  Gait Derangement
[4]  Atrophy
[5]  ROM Testing
[6]  Multiple Lower Extremity Impairments
[7]  Arthritic Conditions
[8]  Amputations
Page 3 of 3
Synopsis to CHAPTER 3 : AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
[9]  Diagnosis Based Estimates
[10]  Peripheral Nerve Injuries
[11]  Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
[12]  Peripheral Vascular Disease
[13]  FEC Adjustment
§ 3.18  AMA Guides Chapter 18: Pain
§ 3.19  Pain Add-on for Sleep Disorders, Sexual Dysfunction and Psyche as Compensable Consequences
of Physical Injuries
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.01
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.01 Introduction
Ch. 3 of this guidebook is dedicated to observations about the AMA Guides. Practitioners are urged to read,
understand, and memorize AMA Guides Chapters 1 and 2 and especially Table 1-2 on page 4. Let the doctors do
the required measurements, which is their job. The practitioner’s job is to make sure the doctors use the AMA
Guides honestly, objectively, reliably, and accurately. There is a lot more wiggle room than you think with ranges of
evidence within the AMA Guides that call for a doctor’s discretion. Remember, they are only Guides.
In the discussion of each AMA Guides chapter below, there will be some reminders about California nuances that
are due to the 2005 and 2013 permanent disability rating schedules. In addition, there are a number of examples in
this guidebook that utilize the AMA Guides and demonstrate their practical use in California workers’ compensation
cases.
In light of existing statutes and case law, Chapter 3 of this guidebook has been extensively revised and updated to
reflect how physicians obtain strict WPI impairment ratings based on objective medical evidence. When there are
controversial medical issues, those issues will be identified and commented on within each section that describes
the strict application of the AMA Guides.
You should note that the AMA Guides do not account for, provide ratings or otherwise describe impairments for
many medical conditions. In fact, the AMA Guides do not provide impairment ratings for infections, organ
transplants or cancer (except skin cancer in Chapter 8 and lung cancer in Chapter 5). Physicians must use their
clinical judgment in determining an appropriate and accurate WPI rating for these serious medical conditions
because the AMA Guides do not provide a framework for doing so.
The practitioner is advised that all physicians must first provide strict whole person impairment (WPI) ratings under
the AMA Guides. This chapter will assist counsel in determining whether or not a physician has correctly utilized the
AMA Guides in arriving at a strict rating.
Each section in this chapter will include a discussion of common mistakes we are seeing in the way many
physicians rate whole person impairments. Giving you examples of common mistakes will help prepare you to seek
clarification from physicians by supplemental reports or by deposition testimony.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.02
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.02 AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of
the Guides
AMA Guides Chapter 1 (purpose and use) as well as AMA Guides Chapter 2 (practical application of the Guides)
[see § 3.03], provides the framework for the entire book. Remember, under the law, the doctor no longer determines
permanent disability. The doctor only determines the residuals of an industrial injury based upon the AMA Guides.
The DEU, a judge, or the parties will calculate the permanent disability rating based upon the 2005 PDRS and the
2013 PDRS.
The AMA Guides refer to the term “impairment” and defines the term as “a loss, loss of use, or derangement of any
body part, organ system or organ function.” At the same time, however, the authors of the AMA Guides admit on
page 2 that “a nationally accepted definition for impairment does not exist.” The authors then describe on page 4
that the Guides describe both anatomic and functional loss with anatomic loss referring to damage to the organ
system or body structure and functional loss referring to a change in function for the organ or body system. They
then inform us that the impairment ratings in the entire book are based on diagnostic criteria, incorporating
anatomic and functional measures. They then go on to say on page 4: “The impairment criteria were developed
from scientific evidence as cited and from consensus of chapter authors or of medical specialty societies.” The
problem is that when an attorney reads the instructions for use in the text and within the tables and figures in each
chapter of the AMA Guides there is no explanation of what relationship there is between a given WPI rating and a
functional loss associated with that rating.
Always remember that in California workers’ compensation cases, physicians may provide WPI ratings based on:
1. Anatomic loss, e.g. amputations, loss of motion of a joint
2. Functional loss, e.g. antalgic gait, loss of field of vision
3. Diagnosis based, e.g. distal clavicle resection arthroplasty, meniscus tear
Some of the chapters in the AMA Guides emphasize diagnosis based impairments, such as Chapter 17, The Lower
Extremities, while other chapters emphasize functional or anatomic loss, such as Chapter 13, The Central and
Peripheral Nervous System.
Many WPI ratings are found in the physical examination section of a medical report or within an operative report
from surgery. Counsel should read the entire medical reports of each physician to make sure all ratable
impairments are described. Diagnostic based WPI ratings are based on a diagnosis and are not based on medical
treatment outcomes. On page 4 of the AMA Guides, the authors consider enlargement of the heart an anatomic
impairment and loss of ejection fraction (the ability of the heart to pump blood) as a functional loss. Similarly, loss of
motion of a joint e.g. in the shoulder, knee, hip, or spine are also considered anatomic losses.
The authors then caution us also on page 4: “Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists
are consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical condition and the degree to which the
impairment decreases an individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living, excluding work. Impairment
ratings were designed to reflect functional limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment percentages
listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment on the individual’s overall ability to perform activities of
daily living, excluding work, as listed in Table 1-2.”
Page 2 of 9
§ 3.02 AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
You notice that the editors of the Guides admit that the descriptions and measurements of WPI are “consensus-
derived.” What does that mean? It means that the measurements of WPI are not scientifically based, they are not
based on any clinical research studies, they are not based on any epidemiologic studies—they are based on a
group of mostly occupational medicine physicians who are members of the AMA voluntary advocacy group that
edited and controlled what is written in the Guides and what is left out. You notice when you read the Guides that
there is no discussion of any minority viewpoint as to how a particular impairment affects ADL functioning. That
being said, the California legislature mandated in 2004 that this edition of the AMA Guides be used as part of the
2005 PDRS and the legislature again mandated the use of the 5th Edition for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013.
There are now 47 states whose laws mandate use of one of the  seven versions of the AMA Guides at least in part,
in their workers’ compensation programs.
Also of interest is the language on page 2 of the AMA Guides which instruct physicians that there are two methods
of evaluating a patient—comparing a patient’s measurements to population averages e.g. range of motion
measurements, or comparing an individual patient’s uninjured side with an injured side and consider the uninjured
side as that patient’s “normal.” The authors go on to indicate that the population averages for range of motion
measurements do not take into account the aging process or gender differences. The actual values in the tables for
range of motion for the spine and extremities reflect averages for range of motion for a healthy population that take
into account for “mixed age and gender.” Physicians are advised to take into account outlier cases such as
measuring range of motion loss in an athlete.
The AMA Guides refer to Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) that are listed in Table 1-2 on page 4. The term “disability”
refers to a person’s reduced ability to meet social or occupational demands, i.e., “An alteration of a person’s ability
to meet personal, social or occupational demands or statutory or regulatory requirements because of an
impairment.” On page 5, the authors state: “Table 1-2 can help to determine how significantly the impairment
impacts those activities. Using the impairment criteria within a class and knowing the activities the individual can
perform, the physician can estimate where the individual stands within that class.” This quote sets the stage for
preparing the injured worker for a deposition, a physician’s evaluation and for trial. Everyone involved in the process
of determining permanent disability in our cases need to frequently refer to and use Table 1-2 in all aspects of a
workers’ compensation claim.
Activities of daily living include:
• self care (personal hygiene)—urinating, defecating, brushing teeth, combing hair, bathing, dressing oneself,
eating
• communication (writing, typing, seeing, hearing, and speaking)
• physical activity (standing, sitting, reclining, walking, climbing stairs)
• sensory function (hearing, seeing, tactile feeling, tasting, and smelling)
• nonspecialized hand activities (grasping, lifting, tactile discrimination)
• travel (riding, driving, flying)
• sexual function (orgasm, ejaculation, lubrication, erection)
• sleep (restful, nocturnal sleep pattern)
COMMON MISTAKE:
When you receive a final WPI rating report from a treating or evaluating physician, always make sure
that you become aware of if and how a physician evaluates the effect of an impairment on an injured
worker’s ADL functioning. More often than not, we receive PQME or AME reports that do not attach a
questionnaire that either the injured worker fills out at the time of the exam or the physician completes
based on a patient’s self-report. When counsel deposes a physician, always ask for a copy of his or
her intake forms, especially any notes on the ADL list from Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA Guides.
Page 3 of 9
§ 3.02 AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
When counsel prepares for a deposition of the applicant or the cross-examination of a physician, the probable
effects of an industrial injury on the injured worker’s activities of daily living must be evaluated and described. See
Ch.7, §§ 7.01 and 7.02 (applicant and physician testimony) in this guidebook.
In the context of an industrial injury, you can also apply these considerations to educational functioning (ability to
learn new skills); social functioning (getting along with co-workers, the public, and supervisors), recreational
functioning, personal functioning (getting dressed, undressed, grooming), and occupational functioning (showing up
on time, work at the appropriate pace, quality of work production, adaptation to stress).
The authors of the AMA Guides on pages 5 and 8 make it clear that the Guides should not be used alone to
determine disability since that determination requires considerations outside the Guides and are intended to be
determined by the user of the Guides in the right context, such as a long term disability insurance company, a state
disability program, or a workers’ compensation system that must take into account a person’s knowledge, skills,
abilities, work experience, education, and age in determining disability factors. These considerations are outside the
purview of the Guides. This language in the AMA Guides implies that if the Guides are used in the determination of
entitlement to workers’ compensation benefits, other factors must be used to assist the “evaluator” in arriving at a
reasonable impairment rating while utilizing the AMA Guides. Those “other factors” may include extrinsic evidence
of the effect of an impairment rating based upon AMA Guides criteria with vocational or other testimony about the
specific impact that impairment has had on a specific employee’s future earning capacity. There is also the question
of which adjustment for “loss of future earning capacity” (FEC adjustment) applies in a given case for injuries
occurring between 2005 and prior to 1/1/2013. See Chs. 2 and 7 of this guidebook.
The authors on page 5 also explain why the Guides are not to be used solely for determination of work disability—
there may not be a connection between a given impairment rating and one’s ability to continue working a particular
job. The impairment rating only describes one’s percentage loss of ability to engage in ADL functioning but not work
since someone with a 30% WPI may either still be able to perform their usual job while someone else cannot
perform any job. The authors go on to say “As a result, impairment ratings are not intended for use as direct
determinants of work disability. When a physician is asked to evaluate work-related disability, it is appropriate for a
physician knowledgeable about the work activities the worker can and cannot do, given the permanent impairment.”
The authors also discuss the impact of two examples of impairment that physicians can use as a guide in
determining a given injured worker’s impairment rating, at least on a macro scale. On page 5, it is stated: “For
example, an individual who receives a 30% whole person impairment due to pre-cardiac [sic] heart disease is
considered from a clinical standpoint to have a 30% reduction in the ability to perform activities of daily living.” On
the same page, the authors then state: “A 90% to 100% WPI indicates a very severe organ or body system
impairment requiring the individual to be fully dependent on others for self-care, approaching death.” This is why if a
WPI rating equals 72% or higher, the permanent disability rating would be 100% permanent and total disability
based on adjustment of the DFEC or 1.4 adjustment factor without adjustment for age or occupation under the 2005
and 2013 PDRS.
In cases in which a physician assigns a “0% WPI rating” the authors define that rating on page 5 as “A 0% WPI
rating is assigned to an individual with an impairment if the impairment has no significant organ or body system
functional consequences and does not limit the performance of the common activities of daily living indicated in
Table 1-2.” Bear in mind that workers’ compensation judges are cautioned during annual training to be suspicious of
any proposed settlement that is based on a 0% WPI rating from a treating or evaluating physician. This is especially
true if there is any objective medical evidence of a medical condition, including diagnostic imaging studies, surgical
procedures, or a diagnosis where the injured worker’s work function may be affected on a permanent basis.
Although the AMA Guides do not directly address work disability, many of the activities of daily living listed on Table
1-2 overlap with work activities such as “non-specialized hand activities of grasping, lifting, tactile discrimination”;
and physical activities such as “standing, sitting, walking, climbing stairs.”
Page 4 of 9
§ 3.02 AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
The discussion of activities of daily living by the authors is instructive on page 5 where they concede that there are
different scales of ADL functioning that focus on specific populations, such as the elderly, hospitalized patients, but
not for working people. The authors specifically state on page 5: “Since there is no agreed-upon scale for a working
population and physicians who use the AMA Guides may evaluate different populations of individuals (i.e., healthy
or chronically ill), a physician may choose the most appropriate of any of the validated scales for a more in-depth
assessment of ADL, to obtain further information to supplement clinical judgment, or to gain assistance in
determining where an individual stands within an impairment range.” This paragraph implies that physicians can
use other nationally accepted standards that expand the definition of ADL functioning, some of which do include
work activities. For example, on page 7 of the AMA Guides the authors refer to “The Medical Outcomes Study
Physical Functioning Measure” which includes several examples of physical activities that could be work related.
Also of importance is that the authors are inviting physicians to use other ADL standards to evaluate where within a
class of impairment applies for a given individual.
The authors then define the term “disability” on page 8: “The Guides continues to define disability as an alteration of
an individual’s capacity to meet personal, social, or occupational demands or statutory or regulatory requirements
because of an impairment … If the physician has the expertise and is well acquainted with the individual’s activities
and needs, the physician may also express an opinion about the presence or absence of a specific disability. For
example, an occupational medicine physician who understands the job requirements in a particular workplace can
provide insights on how the impairment could contribute to a workplace disability.”
This language implies that the authors of the Guides do expect a physician to state how an impairment contributes
to workplace disabilities, provided that the physician is qualified to do so. In the context of California workers’
compensation medical-legal evaluations, our workers’ compensation medical community has many specialists who
have dedicated most of their professional lives to the evaluation of permanent disability and most are probably more
qualified than any occupational medicine physician to conduct these evaluations. Experience has shown since 2005
when the AMA Guides was legislatively mandated to be used in California workers’ compensation cases that
occupational medicine physicians are the most conservative evaluators when it comes to applying the AMA Guides.
In fact, there is significant resistance from most of these specialists in agreeing to alternative rating methods that
are permitted by case law and discussed later in this guidebook. Some institutional medical practices even
discourage creative use of the AMA Guides to establish the most accurate WPI ratings in a given case due to
political or financial reasons. As a result, there is great variation between physicians on what an accurate WPI
rating is in a given case. The reality of the politics of medicine and law collides when the same individual is
evaluated by an occupational medicine physician and an orthopedic surgeon, both of whom have equal training in
the use of the Guides. This is why legal counsel on both sides should consider becoming lay experts in the use of
the Guides and familiarity with the common work-related medical conditions we regularly prosecute and defend.
COMMON MISTAKE:
It is common for us to see many panel QME or treating physician reports where the evaluating or treating
physician assigns a 0% WPI rating for a claimed injured part of body, even in accepted injury cases, when
there is some objective evidence of some functional limitations. That should be a red flag for anyone reading
the report and relying on it since it is probable that the physician missed something—either a medically
significant finding or a properly ratable condition. Workers’ Compensation Judges are instructed to look for
objective medical evidence especially in the physical examination section of reports and in the review of
records within a panel QME, treating physician, or AME report.
There are other red flags that a judge needs to review in determining whether or not a proposed settlement is
adequate. One example includes when there is a proposed settlement with stipulations with request for award
involving a 0% permanent disability and the injured worker missed ten months from work combined with the
mechanism of injury that a 3400 pound cart ran over the injured worker’s great toe. A review of the evidence
includes a review of the entire record and a referral to a panel QME was appropriate in that case resulting in an
ultimate stipulation of 22% permanent disability.
Page 5 of 9
§ 3.02 AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
The California legislature adopted the measurements and descriptions of the AMA Guides in workers’
compensation cases to determine permanent disability, but the AMA Guides are to be used in conjunction with the
2005 PDRS and California law [see Labor Code § 4660]. For example, Labor Code § 3202 mandates liberal
construction in favor of granting benefits to injured workers if the scales of justice are equally in favor or against
granting benefits. In some cases under the AMA Guides, an impairment rating may be 0% upon a strict or literal
interpretation of the AMA Guides, but the applicant may be entitled to benefits under a more lenient interpretation of
the AMA Guides. See § 3.15 for an example of the “DRE gap” in which this may be the case.
As indicated above, the AMA Guides on page 4 permit an evaluating doctor to compare a person’s pre-injury
capacity to the residual functional capacity post-injury, to compare a person’s injured member to his or her
uninjured member (arm or leg), or to compare post injury capacity to population averages of healthy people.
Some interesting nuances about the AMA Guides are that there are range of motion charts and figures based upon
population normal ranges in Chapter 15, The Spine, and Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities, but there are no range
of motion measurements based upon population normal ranges in Chapter 17, The Lower Extremities. Another
interesting observation about the AMA Guides is that there is more of an emphasis on the effects of an impairment
on a person’s ADL functioning in the internal medicine chapters (such as the heart, vascular system, digestive
system) and less of an emphasis of the effects on ADL functioning for the ratings for orthopedic impairments in
Chapters 15, 16, and 17. Also experience has taught practitioners that Chapter 13 can be used by neurologists and
orthopedic surgeons for musculoskeletal impairments in conjunction with the orthopedic surgery Chapters 15, 16,
and 17. In fact, many orthopedic surgeons are not aware of tables, methods, or the text in Chapter 13 that can and
should apply in some orthopedic cases. A good example is in severely injured lumbar spinal cases where part of
the rating is appropriate in Chapter 15 can also have a station and gait impairment rating from Chapter 13.
The AMA Guides refer to 12 kinds of causation: constitutional, exciting, immediate, local, precipitating,
predisposing, primary, proximate, remote, secondary, specific, and ultimate. For the purpose of the Guides,
causation means “an identifiable factor (like an injury or exposure to hazards of a disease) that results in a
medically identifiable condition.” On page 11 of the AMA Guides, where the editor’s definition of causation is
discussed, omitted from the text is the California flavor of causation of injury—that industrial exposure need only be
a contributing factor [see Guerra v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1985) 168 Cal. App. 3d 195, 50 Cal. Comp.
Cases 270; McAllister v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1968) 69 Cal. 2d 408, 71 Cal. Rptr. 697, 33 Cal. Comp.
Cases 660, 445 P.2d 313; South Coast Framing v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Clark) (2015) 61 Cal. 4th 291, 188
Cal. Rptr. 3d 46, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 489; Guerra v. Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board (2016) 246 Cal. App.
4th 1301, 201 Cal. Rptr. 3d 623, 81 Cal. Comp. Cases 324.
There is a very unusual discussion on page 9 that refers, indirectly, to the use of regional impairments that can be
converted to whole person impairment, specifically the fingers and the spine. Section 1.3 on page 9 is like a fish out
of water and as discussed in Section 3.15 of this guidebook, Section 1.3 should appear on Page 427 in conjunction
with Figure 15-19 on that page. The language on page 9 states: “Within some musculoskeletal regions, a
consensus group developed weights to reflect the relative importance of certain regions. For example, different
fingers or different areas of the spine are given different weights, representing their unique and relative importance
to the region’s overall functioning. These weights, which have gained acceptance in clinical practice, have been
retained to enable regulatory authorities to convert from a regional body to whole person impairment when needed.”
The authors and editors of this section do not cite any medical or other authority for this assertion but when read
with the footnote under Figure 15-19 on page 427 of the AMA Guides, a creative and viable alternative rating
method for a poorly functioning spine is possible in appropriate cases.
AMA Guides Chapter 1, page 10, also establishes the rule that impairment ratings within the same region (e.g., the
neck and back, or a shoulder and wrist) are combined in the Combined Values Chart on page 604 of the Guides
(the “mother of all MDTs”) before combining the regional impairment rating with that from another region (except the
thumb joints, ankle, or subtalar joints, which are added and not combined due to their respective complex motions).
See AMA Guides Chapters 15, 16, and 17 (the spine, upper extremities and lower extremities, respectively) since
this rule may not apply in California workers’ compensation cases. You must consult the 2005 Permanent Disability
Rating Schedule to determine specific rules in California that apply that may differ from the instructions in the AMA
Page 6 of 9
§ 3.02 AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
Guides. For example, see the specific rules on multiple impairments involving a single part of an extremity, e.g. the
shoulder, where you must combine upper extremity ratings for each impairment and then convert to whole person
impairment whereas some other impairments in the upper and lower extremities are converted to whole person,
adjusted for permanent disability, and then combined. See the 2005 PDRS page 1-11.
On pages 9–10 of the AMA Guides, the authors discuss the use of the Combined Values Chart, (the “CVC”) on
page 604. First of all, practitioners are advised not to use the CVC on page 604 of the AMA Guides because they
are inaccurate. The DEU long ago advised us to use the Combined Values Chart in the official 2005 PDRS instead
of the one on page 604. What is the purpose of the Combined Values Chart? It is simply a mathematical formula
that prevents multiple whole person impairments to rate higher than 100% WPI. Remember, in Chapter 1 of the
AMA Guides the authors state that a person who is 90% to 100% WPI impairment cannot perform ADLs or self-care
and is approaching death. So where along the continuum of WPI does a person become permanent and totally
disabled from work? The CVC all but prevents many severely impaired industrially injured workers from being rated
100% disabled based solely on WPI ratings alone.
The use of the Combined Values Chart in workers’ compensation cases is problematic. There are two separate
uses of the CVC in our cases. The first application is by the evaluating or treating physician who uses the CVC in
arriving at an overall WPI rating for a body part that has multiple factors of impairment, e.g. using the Range of
Motion method for a spinal impairment. Then the DEU rating specialist uses the CVC again in applying it to
permanent disability rating strings for multiple parts of body injured in a single injury or cumulative trauma claim.
On page 10, the authors of the AMA Guides openly criticize the use of the CVC by stating: “A scientific formula has
not been established to indicate the best way to combine multiple impairments … A combination of some
impairments could decrease overall functioning more than suggested by just adding the impairment ratings for the
separate impairments (e.g. blindness and loss of use of both hands). When other multiple impairments are
combined, a less than additive approach may be more appropriate … Other options are to combine (add, subtract,
or multiply) multiple impairments based on the extent to which they affect an individual’s ability to perform activities
of daily living. The current edition [of the AMA Guides] has retained the same combined values chart, since it has
become the standard of practice in many jurisdictions. Other approaches, when published in scientific peer-
reviewed literature will be evaluated for future editions.”
The Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides was published in November 2000. The 6th Edition of the AMA Guides was
published in December 2007 and did not adopt any new combined values chart. The scientific validity of the CVC
remains in doubt and continues to be adopted without any viable and reliable scientific based alternative. In 2021,
the American Medical Association met to discuss whether to issue a seventh edition of the AMA Guides. The AMA
sub-committee, including their Director of Product Development, decided to develop an electronic version of an
updated version of the 6th Edition, with updated diagnostic criteria and revised WPI ratings for body parts or
systems that were highly criticized in the original 6th Edition. None of this has changed the Combined Values Chart.
As a result, case law has developed in California workers’ compensation cases that cast doubt on the applicability
of the CVC in certain cases, especially when it can be demonstrated by an evaluating or treating physician that
there is a synergistic effect of multiple impairments on a person’s ability to engage in activities of daily living. See
the discussion of case law on the combined values chart in this guidebook in chapter 6, including Athens
Administrators v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Kite) [(2013) 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 213 (writ den.)].
Finally, AMA Guides Chapter 1 makes it clear that subjective complaints of pain and fatigue must have a
pathophysiologic explanation to justify certain impairments. Pain is considered part of the impairments, and greater
than anticipated pain related impairments may have to be rated separately, as will side effects of medication. For a
discussion of rating side effects of medication, see Ch. 4, § 4.12, of this guidebook for developing the record to
obtain accurate ratings.
AMA Guides Chapter 1 suggests that if the Guides are used for workers’ compensation purposes, you need to have
information about a person’s job duties (preferably from a job analysis) and whether an impaired person’s job duties
can be modified or assistive devices used (e.g., a hydraulic lift for someone who cannot lift over 50 lbs.) to help
Page 7 of 9
§ 3.02 AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
determine disability as opposed to impairment. We now know that the 2005 and 2013 PDRS legally take care of
these issues.
While physicians will be more concerned about reading the instructions in the AMA Guides for specific regions of
the body that are claimed to be industrially injured, e.g., a back and neck injury under AMA Guides, Chapter 15,
experience is telling us that there are some physicians who ignore, never read, or follow the instructions in AMA
Guides Chapters 1 and 2. If you carefully read these chapters, you will see how few medical reports purportedly
written under the AMA Guides are actually “AMA compliant” medical reports. This should provide fodder for counsel
to question physicians via interrogatory or deposition about their conclusions in written medical reports. See Chs. 4,
5, and 6 of this guidebook. In fact, a good question to ask a doctor during a deposition is: “When was the last time
you read Chapters 1 and 2 in the AMA Guides?” Physicians are told during their continuing education programs that
if part of their medical practice includes writing MMI reports in workers’ compensation cases, they need to read
Chapters 1 and 2 at least once a year.
There are some medical conditions that may result in impairments that are listed in more than one chapter of the
AMA Guides including deep vein thrombosis, AMA Guides, Chapters 4 (Table 4-5, page 76) and 17 (Table 17-38,
page 554); Chronic Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS, Type I, and Type II), AMA Guides Chapter 13 (Table 13-22,
page 343), Chapter 16 (Table 16-16, page 496), Chapter 17, Section 17.2m, page 553, and Chapter 18, (Table 18-
2, page 571, and Table 18-3, page 575)]; upper and lower extremity impairments, AMA Guides Chapters 4, 13, 16,
and 17 (which include multiple tables for vascular, neurological and functional impairments), and many others.
There are also medical conditions that are not included in the AMA Guides because in some cases the condition is
not well understood or because the authors of the AMA Guides could not agree on the criteria for impairments.
Some examples of such medical conditions that are not directly found in the AMA Guides are plantar fasciitis,
osteochondritis, thoracic outlet syndrome, or epichondilitis.
In Section 1.5 of the AMA Guides, page 11, the authors state: “The Guides nonetheless provides a framework for
evaluating new or complex conditions. Most adult conditions with measurable impairments can be evaluated under
the Guides. In situations where impairment ratings are not provided, the Guides suggest that physicians use clinical
judgment, comparing measurable impairment resulting from the unlisted condition to measurable impairment
resulting from similar conditions with similar impairment of function in performing activities of daily living.”
In contrast, page 1-4 of the 2005 PDRS, second column, second paragraph reads as follows:
“If an impairment based on an objective medical condition is not addressed by the AMA Guides, physicians should
use clinical judgment, comparing measurable impairment resulting from the unlisted objective medical condition to
measurable impairment resulting from similar objective medical conditions with similar impairment of function in
performing activities of daily living. (AMA Guides page 11).”
So you can see the similarity between the two instructions but at the same time, the 2005 PDRS emphasizes an
objective medical condition as opposed to an “unlisted condition.” This is why throughout this guidebook, reference
is always made to require physicians to identify permanent objective medical findings. This is because the AMA
Guides is very short on identifying actual medical conditions. For example, the AMA Guides has three chapters
dedicated to orthopedic medical conditions—Chapters 15, 16, and 17. In real orthopedic medicine, orthopedic
surgery references that include the diagnosis, pathophysiology, treatment and prognosis of orthopedic conditions
comprise volumes of books and not just three chapters in one book. So how can all orthopedic conditions in our
cases be identified in the AMA Guides? They can’t, and that is why the 2005 PDRS requires physicians to use
clinical judgment and to identify objective medical conditions and use listed conditions in the Guides to obtain an
accurate and reliable WPI rating for the unlisted medical condition that results in the same or similar impairment of
function. SB 863 enacted in 2012 does not change these applications of the instructions in the 2005 PDRS and
applies to all injuries occurring after 1/1/2005 and new injuries that occur on or after 1/1/2013.
However, the politics of medicine, along with the fact that there are different authors for each chapter of the AMA
Guides, demonstrate the conflict in conclusions about rating impairments caused by conditions such as thoracic
outlet syndrome or fibromyalgia. In Section 18.2 of the AMA Guides, page 568 and later at page 569, the authors
Page 8 of 9
§ 3.02 AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
state “… [T]he diagnosis of fibromyalgia is based on individuals’ reports of widespread pain and their reports of
tenderness during physical examination. Despite extensive research, no specific underlying biological abnormality
has been discovered to explain the reports of these people …. Finally, as in the case of fibromyalgia, reliable
diagnostic criteria exist, but physicians disagree about whether the condition diagnosed by use of these criteria has
a specific definable biologic basis …. The controversies described above cannot be resolved in this chapter
[Chapter 18] of the Guides for the simple reason that the medical community has not achieved consensus about
how to construe such conditions as myofascial pain syndrome, fibromyalgia and ‘disputed neurogenic’ thoracic
outlet syndrome.” We do know that up to 3% of the world population has the diagnosis of fibromyalgia from
rheumatologists, according to the American College of Rheumatology.
As a result of our legislature adopting the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides 5th Edition in
workers’ compensation cases, some parties are interpreting the language in Chapter 18 and elsewhere in the AMA
Guides that medical conditions like fibromyalgia are “dead in the water” as far as being a part of a work-related
injury that results in permanent impairments. As stated above, some physicians and others are not reading
Chapters 1 and 2 of the AMA Guides for a general explanation of how the AMA Guides are to be used and how
they work in reality. However, some AME quality rheumatologists are adopting the language quoted above from
Chapter 1, Section 1.5, page 11 of the AMA Guides and are rating permanent impairment for fibromyalgia by
analogy and are utilizing Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, Table 13-4, page 317 (Sleep
disorders), Table 13-8, page 325 (Emotional or behavioral disorders), Chapter 6, The Digestive System, Table 6-3,
page 121 (Irritable bowel syndrome), Chapter 9, The Hematopoietic System, Table 9-2, page 193 (anemia) and
Table 9-3, page 200 (white blood count problem), along with any appropriate orthopedic chapter (Chapters 15, 16,
or 17) that may have precipitated the overall flu-like symptoms in patients who claim they have fibromyalgia.
Other physicians are now discounting the diagnosis of fibromyalgia and are claiming that the condition, although
recognized in medical literature, can only be evaluated under the AMA Guides as a DSM psychiatric diagnosis of a
Somatoform Pain Disorder or Somatic Related Disorder, which diagnostic criteria almost completely overlaps with
the symptoms of fibromyalgia as reported by patients with that diagnosis from a rheumatologist. If fibromyalgia is
determined to be a form of a psychiatric diagnosis of a somatoform pain disorder, any impairment rating from that
diagnosis would be increased by a factor of 40% due to the adjustment of loss of future earning capacity for a
psychiatric condition as an FEC ranking of [8]. See Ch. 2 of this guidebook for a discussion of the future earning
capacity adjustment in the California 2005 PDRS. Perhaps case law will lead to a resolution of this controversy as
to whether or not a condition like fibromyalgia or thoracic outlet syndrome can be recognized under California law
as a compensable medical condition resulting in permanent impairments that are ratable by analogy under the AMA
Guides. It is clear that under the Guzman III case, discussed in this guidebook in chapter 7, will allow these
conditions to be rated under the AMA Guides.
The rest of Chapter 1, pages 13–15, discusses workers’ compensation, employability determinations, railroad and
maritime workers, and the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) evaluations. These are general discussions that
have no impact on our use of the AMA Guides in California workers’ compensation cases.
As we navigate each chapter of the AMA Guides 5th Edition and determine how each chapter may apply in our
cases, we will integrate our discussion of the Guides with the requirements of the application of the 2005 PDRS and
the instructions therein. At the end of each chapter analysis of the AMA Guides, we will indicate the DFEC or FEC
adjustment factor that specifically applies to each chapter. We will, however, remind you that for injuries occurring
on or after 1/1/2013, there is no DFEC or FEC adjustment factor—but there is a 1.4 multiplier adjustment factor that
applies to all parts of body, including those that are covered in each chapter of the AMA Guides [see Lab. Code
§ 4660.1.(b)].
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many physicians are not familiar with the rules in Chapters 1 and 2 of the AMA Guides. This author has
attended a number of medical seminars over the years in which these two essential chapters are glossed
over. If counsel sends an advocacy letter to a PQME or AME, then make sure to quote appropriate sections
Page 9 of 9
§ 3.02 AMA Guides Chapter 1: Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
of these chapters that could impact the medical conclusions of the physician, especially in situations that call
for an impairment rating but where there is no clearly defined medical condition within the Guides. There are
physicians who are unwilling to ascribe a WPI rating for a medical condition that is not mentioned in the
AMA Guides, and the instructions in Chapters 1 and 2 clearly indicate that impairment ratings can be
obtained by analogous listings in the Guides.
In addition, the language that was originally used by physicians who concluded that multiple impairments could be
additive rather than subject to the Combined Values Chart is in Chapter 1, Section 1.4 on page 9 of the AMA
Guides. See, e.g., County of Los Angeles v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (La Count) [(2015) 80 Cal. Comp. Cases
470 (writ den.)].
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.03
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.03 AMA Guides Chapter 2: Practical Application of the Guides
AMA Guides Chapter 2 sets forth practical application of the Guides. Once a determination is made about a
person’s residuals of an illness or injury, the “result” is expressed in the form of “whole person impairment.”
Someone who has a 100% whole person impairment is dead or in need of full time attendant care. The
determination of a rating of a whole person impairment cannot be made until the person has reached “maximum
medical improvement,” which is now the same as “permanent and stationary for rating purposes” [see 8 Cal. Code
Reg. §§ 9785, 10152].
Maximum medical improvement (MMI) means that the person’s ADL functioning will not improve in a year with or
without medical treatment. Remember, under current law, a person could be declared permanent and stationary
and ratable for PD, but still need medical treatment despite the P&S status. Interestingly, Labor Code § 4660 under
SB 899 does not use the term MMI, whereas AD Rules 9785 and 10152 do [see 8 Cal. Code Reg. §§ 9785, 10152].
The AMA Guides mandate that an evaluating doctor first use the chapter for a patient’s most dysfunctional
anatomic or functional deficit. This is the “primary impairment.” For example, if someone has a back and knee
injury, you use AMA Guides Chapter 15 [see § 3.15] first, and then AMA Guides Chapter 17 [see § 3.17] second, if
the back condition is worse than the knee condition. You may also have to use AMA Guides Chapter 13 [see
§ 3.13] if there are any neurological deficits as well. The authors specifically state on page 19: “Generally, the organ
system where the problems originate or where the dysfunction is greatest is the chapter to be used for evaluating
the impairment.” This language is significant and formed the basis of case law that requires strict WPI ratings to be
determined by a physician first using the chapter, table, and method that fits the body part or body system before
any alternative WPI rating determination is made to rebut a strict one.
Related but separate conditions are rated separately, and impairment ratings are combined unless the second
impairment is included in the first impairment. For upper and lower extremities, if a condition or injury is bilateral,
you rate each side separately and use the Combined Values Chart on page 604 of the AMA Guides. Similarly, if two
significant but unrelated conditions occur, each impairment rating is calculated separately, converted into whole
person impairment and then combined using the same chart on page 604. These rules are discussed on page 19 of
the AMA Guides. However, you must always bear in mind the separate and binding rules about using the combined
values chart as instructed in the 2005 PDRS—that you combine ratings after adjustment for occupation and age in
order to arrive at an overall permanent disability rating for each injury. This is a separate and distinct process from
the physician’s role to utilize the combined values chart in arriving at a strict WPI rating in the first place.
In section 2.5c on page 19, called “Consistency” the authors of the Guides state: “The physician must use the entire
range of clinical skill and judgment when assessing whether or not the measurements or tests results are plausible
and consistent with the impairment being evaluated. If, in spite of an observation or test result, the medical
evidence appears insufficient to verify that an impairment of a certain magnitude exists, the physician may modify
the impairment rating accordingly and then describe and explain the reason for the modification in writing.” The tone
of this language implies that if a physician does not believe the test results, for example, in testing range of motion
for a spinal injury, he or she can lower the rating. In real cases, physicians are sometimes using this language to
increase WPI ratings because of a medical opinion that the testing described in the AMA Guides are not clinically
significant, are unreliable, or are obsolete.
Page 2 of 7
§ 3.03 AMA Guides Chapter 2: Practical Application of the Guides
You will see more specifically in the upper and lower extremity chapters that for upper extremity impairments you
have to multiply the upper extremity impairment by .6 in order to calculate the WPI. For the lower extremity
impairment, you multiply the lower extremity impairment by .4 to calculate the WPI. The upper extremities including
the shoulders are 60% of the whole person in terms of function, and the lower extremities including the hips are
40% of the whole person in terms of function.
AMA Guides Chapter 2 indicates that a 10% variance between medical examiners in the measurements (like range
of motion) is reasonable. Many chapters of the Guides require three reliable measurements before an amount is
deemed to be clinically accurate. Doctors are asked to perform measurements without assistive devices or to
perform the tests with and without the devices and compare the differences.
Specific chapters in the AMA Guides include instructions for physicians on how to conduct range of motion
measurements. In the orthopedic chapters, AMA Guides, Chapter 15, The Spine, Chapter 16, The Upper
Extremities, and Chapter 17, The Lower Extremities, the physician is instructed to require a patient to “warm up”
and then the physician takes at least three measurements in a row that must be consistent within 5 degrees or 10%
of each other in order for the range of motion testing to be considered valid and reliable.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many physicians use their own definitions of “normal” ranges of motion and do not use the normal ranges of
motion that are listed in the AMA Guides. This is a very recurrent problem in many reports from treating and
evaluating physicians throughout the state, and counsel must be mindful of the normal ranges of motion for
the spine, shoulders, knees, elbows, wrists, and ankles when you read medical reports. It is not unusual for
a physician to testify in a deposition that he or she used their own “eye-ball” method to determine normal or
abnormal ranges of motion. If counsel establishes that, then the report does not constitute substantial
medical evidence. When counsel reviews a physician’s MMI report at the physical examination section,
make sure the physician indicates what “normal” ranges are that are the reference points for a WPI rating.
Also, make sure the physician indicates that the patient does a “warm-up” of three movements of the range
of motion being tested before the actual measurements are made.
In addition, we are seeing medical reports from physicians that do not correctly reflect what is considered “normal”
ranges of motion that are based upon accepted normal ranges of motion that are described in the AMA Guides. For
example, some physicians consider 30 degrees a “normal” range of motion for lateral flexion of the lumbar spine
(bending to the left or right side) when in fact the AMA Guides lists 25 degrees as normal. See AMA Guides, Table
15-9, page 409. So a patient who has 25 degrees of right and left lateral flexion would have normal ranges of
motion for those motions based upon the AMA Guides with no ratable impairment, but would have an apparent 5-
degree loss of motion or 15–20% loss of lateral flexion, which is a ratable impairment for each direction of motion
based upon the physician’s erroneous assumption of what constitutes “normal.”
The AMA Guides allow for medication side effects that cause impairments. See pages 20, Section 2.5g and page
600 in the glossary. Doctors are allowed to give severity increases if a person’s impairment is increased by the side
effects of medication or if the medication itself causes its own impairment. On page 20, section 2.5g of the Guides
states that a physician may add up to 3% WPI just for complexity of treatment of certain medical conditions, even
though the treatment is effective and the medical condition goes into remission. In other cases, “the physician
should use the appropriate parts of the Guides to evaluate impairment related to pharmaceutical effects. If
information in the Guides is lacking, the physician may combine an estimated impairment percent based on the
severity of the effect, with the primary organ system impairment by means of the combined values chart.” In general
medical practice, it is widely understood that long-term use of any medication has potential long-term
consequences. Even the long-term use of aspirin is known to potentially cause other long-term health
consequences.
Page 3 of 7
§ 3.03 AMA Guides Chapter 2: Practical Application of the Guides
So the general rule is that if an injured worker is taking many medications that have significant side effects a
physician can add up to 3% WPI due to the medications. If treatment is complex, e.g., the patient has to go to a
clinic every week for life, up to 3% WPI can be added to an underlying WPI rating. If medication side effects can be
separately rated directly under a different chapter, table or method besides the underlying WPI rating, then any WPI
separately caused by the medication can be rated separately and combined with the underlying WPI rating.
Thus, it appears that for a back or neck injury, you use AMA Guides Chapter 15 [see § 3.15] for the underlying
spinal WPI rating and Chapter 6 [see § 3.06] for the side effects of NSAIDs due to the orthopedic condition. On
page 600 of the AMA Guides under the glossary section, the term “Effects of Medication” is defined as follows:
“Medication may impact the individual’s signs, symptoms and ability to function. The physician may choose to
increase the impairment estimate by a small percentage (1% to 3%) to account for the effects of treatment.”
Counsel also has to be mindful that a completely independent impairment can occur from the chronic use of
medications. As you will see later in this Guidebook, treatment with any kind of steroid can cause or worsen
diabetes; long-term chronic use of NSAIDs can cause liver or kidney damage or gastritis.
This raises an important point about the AMA Guides. We usually refer in our daily workers’ compensation
colloquialisms that a given case is one involving “ortho, psyche, and internal” components. We can still use the
phrase in shorthand, but we can no longer use it in determining permanent disability. The Guides are very specific
as to regions of the body and parts of the body. For example, a new “ortho, psyche and internal” case could
potentially involve permanent impairments listed in the 14 chapters of the AMA Guides that have whole person
impairment ratings plus the two chapters, i.e., AMA Guides Chapters 14 and 18, that do not have such ratings. So
you can end up using the entire AMA Guides for one case.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Since becoming a judge, this author has seen countless number of cases where the Application for
Adjudication of Claim and an attorney-generated DWC-1 Claim form and Pre-Trial Conference Statement
use colloquial terminology of alleged parts of body injured. It is not unusual to see, e.g., “Applicant injured
his back, neck, upper extremities, stress, high blood pressure, psyche” as alleged body parts. Best practices
would dictate, especially in a Pre-trial Conference Statement to allege instead: “lumbar spine, cervical spine,
shoulders, elbows, wrists, hands, fingers, cardio-vascular system in the form of hypertensive disease,
psyche and emotional system.” Counsel should use the same terms for parts of body that are used in the
AMA Guides so that treating and evaluating physicians are on the same page as the legal representatives.
On the issue of apportionment, the evaluating doctor is allowed to make an estimate of a prior impairment in order
to determine what a current  impairment is. The best example is one of a current low back injury with a prior history
of low back complaints and treatment. A doctor who is evaluating a current spinal impairment could review prior
medical records and diagnostic studies and estimate any prior impairment using the AMA Guides to apportion part
of a current impairment to a prior one. However, the authors on page 21 of the AMA Guides caution: “Valid
assessment of a change in the impairment estimate would depend on the reliability of the previous estimate and the
evidence upon which it was based. If a prior impairment evaluation was not performed, but sufficient historical
information is available to currently estimate the prior impairment, the assessment would be performed based on
the most recent Guides criteria. However, if the information is insufficient to accurately document the change, then
the physician needs to explain that decision and should not estimate a change.”
Current evolving case law supports this statement that was written in the 5th Edition of the Guides in 2000. There
are a number of unpublished WCAB panel decisions and writ denied DCA decisions that do not allow a retroactive
WPI rating of a prior injury or award in applying Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664 apportionment. Counsel is cautioned
about relying on any discussion about apportionment in the AMA Guides since the legal definitions and applications
of apportionment of permanent disability are statutorily mandated and defined in the California Labor Code and
interpreted under case law that are specific to those statutes.
Page 4 of 7
§ 3.03 AMA Guides Chapter 2: Practical Application of the Guides
COMMON MISTAKE:
Physicians will try to assign a retroactive WPI rating to a prior injury to the same body part or region, e.g.,
lumbar spine. The only time this would be a viable basis for apportionment would be if the physician in the
current injury is the same one who previously assigned the WPI rating in the first injury. Most of the time, this
is not the case, and it would be too speculative for a current evaluating or treating physician to use someone
else’s measurements and ratings to subtract from current measurements and ratings. Even giving a
retroactive DRE category for a prior injury or condition is problematic since assignment of a DRE impairment
rating requires a physical examination by a physician at the time the rating is established.
AMA Guides Chapter 2 also lists the requirements for a valid medical report to comply with the Guides, which goal
is to provide consistent, relevant, and reproducible medical conclusions about a person’s impairment regardless of
the reason for the medical evaluation. However, we are seeing a significant variation in conclusions between
physicians in the same case even when the Guides are being used.
You must be certain that all medical reports from treating and evaluating physicians comply with Section 2.6 of the
AMA Guides on pages 21 and 22. In addition, it is equally mandated by law that all MMI physician reports also
comply with Labor Code § 4628 and 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10682. Labor Code § 4628(a) states:
Except as provided in subdivision (c), no person, other than the physician who signs the medical-legal report,
except a nurse performing those functions routinely performed by a nurse, such as taking blood pressure, shall
examine the injured employee or participate in the non-clerical preparation of the report, including all of the
following:
(1) Taking a complete history.
(2) Reviewing and summarizing prior medical records.
(3) Composing and drafting the conclusions of the report.
Sub-section 4628(b) states: “The report shall disclose the date when and location where the evaluation was
performed; that the physician signing the report actually performed the evaluation ….”
Sub-section 4658(e) states: “Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall make the report
inadmissible as evidence and shall eliminate any liability for payment of any medical-legal expense incurred in
connection with the report.”
Counsel is advised to read the entire statute and regulation [see Labor Code § 4628; 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10682].
These excerpts are included in this guidebook because so many panel QME reports and treating physician PR-4
reports do not comply with these sections. We have seen many cases where the PQME does not perform the
measurements for range of motion as called for in the AMA Guides during an MMI examination because those
measurements are conducted by a clinician or chiropractor who is brought in for that purpose by the PQME or
treating physician without any advanced notice or permission of the parties.
Measurements taken by anyone other than the assigned PQME or treating physician are not valid and cannot
constitute substantial medical evidence since they were not performed by the PQME or primary treating physician,
as required in these sections. Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides requires that an evaluating physician exercise his or
her clinical judgement in conducting the physical examination of a person while utilizing the AMA Guides. If a
chiropractor or medical assistant performs the measurements, even with the PQME orthopedic surgeon in the room
at the time of the measurements, any report that is issued by the PQME is not substantial medical evidence and
should not and will not be reimbursed by a claims administrator. This is true even if the chiropractor or clinician
signs the report, or even if the PQME personally observes the chiropractor or clinician perform the measurements.
There is even a non-published WCAB panel decision that indicated a chiropractor or medical assistant cannot
Page 5 of 7
§ 3.03 AMA Guides Chapter 2: Practical Application of the Guides
perform the range of motion testing on a patient even with the actual PQME in the room observing the process
unless the parties stipulated to the physician using a surrogate evaluator since the physician himself was disabled
and could not perform the measurements himself.
COMMON MISTAKE:
It is very unfortunate that we see many PQME reports wherein the selected PQME physician did not perform
the range of motion testing or the actual physical examination of the injured worker. Counsel needs to make
sure when they receive a medical-legal report that the physical examination is actually fully performed by the
PQME and not a technician, chiropractor, nurse, or other person other than the selected physician. One
physician asked this author if it is legally proper for his nurse to measure the circumference of the injured
worker’s calves and thighs. Since atrophy of the lower extremities are ratable WPI impairments, the
physician should be the one who measures the circumference of lower extremities. Similarly, it is arguable in
a case where the injured employee is claiming cardio-vascular hypertensive disease, the evaluating
physician should do the blood pressure testing and not a nurse, which otherwise is routinely done by a nurse
in general medicine.
Under Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides, each report must have:
• A history of the medical condition
• Work history
• Current clinical status (presenting symptoms, physical exam findings, treatment history)
• Diagnostic results
• P&S/MMI status
• Final diagnosis and impairments
• Causation and apportionment
• Impairment rating criteria
• Prognosis
• Residual functional capacities and limitations
Physicians are instructed to use Table 1-2 (page 4) in the AMA Guides for guidance on determining limitations. In
other words, the physician must describe how a medical condition affects a person’s ADL functioning. Continuing
medical education for QMEs and physicians who treat injured workers include as part of the curriculum that
medical-legal evaluators should discuss ADL functioning with a patient twice during an examination—the first time
when the patient completes any routine questionnaire the physician requires as part of the evaluation process, and
then again towards the end of the examination process itself. The physician should fill out the ADL questions
themself and not rely on the patient’s own self-report that occurred before the examination occurred. This allows
time for the physician to establish a better relationship with the patient in terms of communicating present signs,
symptoms, and complaints the patient is claiming due to an injury and the effects of those on their ADL functioning.
The physician is directed to calculate the impairment rating by comparing the medical findings to the impairment
criteria in the AMA Guides for each region or part thereof. Finally, the physician must describe the way the whole
person impairment (or regional impairment) was calculated. In practice, we have seen physicians fail to convert
regional impairments to whole person impairments, especially for upper and lower extremity conditions. In addition,
many attorneys forget to review the instructions in the 2005 PDRS that defines certain applications of how and
when to use the combined values chart. These instructions sometimes differ from the instructions about the use of
the combined values chart in the text of the AMA Guides, especially during discussions of upper and lower
Page 6 of 7
§ 3.03 AMA Guides Chapter 2: Practical Application of the Guides
extremity impairments. If counsel intends to cross-examine a physician by deposition on a WPI rating issue, he or
she is strongly advised to review the instructions in the PDRS as part of the preparation for the doctor’s deposition.
The AMA Guides have a very narrow application in terms of the timing of an impairment. Impairment ratings of a
medical condition are based upon the “here and now” of that medical condition. There is an element of “tunnel
vision” while using the AMA Guides because the impairment rating only accounts for current impairments, but does
not allow for any anticipated future impairments that stem from a current one. For example, post-traumatic arthritis
is usually a medical certainty when there has been injury to an articulating joint (like a knee, hip, ankle, or shoulder)
directly from a trauma, invasive surgery, or both. The AMA Guides will not account for any known future or
predictable impairments that arise from a current injury or illness.
You will see the medical term “ankylosis” throughout the AMA Guides. This term means “frozen position” or more
accurately, “fused joint.” We see it in workers’ compensation cases in spinal, foot/ankle, hip, knee, and some
arthritic conditions in general. If a person has a limited range of motion due to a totally or partially fused joint, there
are specific impairment calculations for that joint ankylosis that are separate from the calculations for an impairment
in a joint that is not in ankylosis. See, for example, Tables 17-24 through 17-28, page 541, for ankylosis of an ankle,
Tables 17-15 through 17-19, pages 538–539, for ankylosis of a hip, and Tables 17-20 through 17-23, page 540, for
ankylosis of a knee.
The 5th Edition of the AMA Guides was first published in November 2000 with a second print edition in February
2002. The 4th Edition was published in 1993. The 6th Edition was published in December 2007 and the revised 6th
Edition is being rewritten in 2022. This raises a cautionary note about using the AMA Guides for certain medical
conditions. Some of the diagnostic criteria for medical conditions mentioned in the Guides are now obsolete. For
example, chronic regional pain syndrome (CRPS, Type I, and Type II) are mentioned in the AMA Guides 5th Edition
in multiple places as indicated in this guidebook in § 3.02. CRPS is specifically discussed in AMA Guides, Chapter
16, Section 16.5e, pages 495–496, and Table 16-16 on page 496. The text states that in order to have a valid
diagnosis for CRPS in an upper extremity, the patient must have at least eight of the “findings” noted in Table 16-16
of the condition. The International Association of the Study of Pain, referred to in the text in the 5th Edition of the
AMA Guides, has since changed the diagnostic criteria for CRPS and no longer requires the eight symptom criteria
or “findings” listed in Table 16-16 for the diagnosis of either type of CRPS. See “Diagnosis of Complex Regional
Pain Syndrome,” by Harden and Bruehl, Clinical Journal of Pain, Vol 22, Number 5, page 415, June 2006, and
“Complex Regional Pain Syndrome: A Review,” by Dureja, Journal of Postgraduate Medicine, 2004 Vol. 50, Issue
4, page 300. In fact, in the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides, which is not and will not be adopted in California’s
workers’ compensation system, the authors have adopted the clinical diagnostic criteria of CRPS and are not using
the research based criteria that is reflected in Table 16-16 of the 5th Edition of the Guides.
What are the parties to do if the descriptions and measurements of impairments in the AMA Guides for a medical
condition are no longer valid based upon current scientific consensus? What if the underlying medical condition has
new diagnostic criteria that were not anticipated or accepted when the 5th edition of the AMA Guides was
published? What if a medical condition that did not result in a ratable impairment is now considered ratable? The
physician should refer to AMA Guides Chapter 1 and use his or her “best clinical judgment” in determining
impairments by analogy. The possible obsolescence of the AMA Guides with respect to certain medical conditions
may have been one reason that Labor Code § 4660(c) and new Labor Code § 4660.1 states that the 2005 and 2013
PDRS and use of the AMA Guides 5th edition are “prima facie” evidence of permanent disability. That language in
Labor Code § 4660(c) implies that rebuttal evidence should be allowed to prove the existence of permanent
disability outside the four corners of the 2005 and 2013 PDRS and the AMA Guides 5th edition. See Ch. 7 of this
guidebook on extrinsic evidence.
The appellate court in Guzman III, discussed in Chapter 7 of this guidebook, allows physicians to utilize more recent
diagnostic criteria for illnesses and injuries and to incorporate them into determining the most accurate and reliable
WPI ratings using the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides. However, the physician must indicate exactly what extrinsic
evidence he or she is relying on for the diagnosis, its source and its scientific support and validity. In addition, the
physician may not go outside the four corners of the AMA Guides 5th Edition in order to establish the WPI ratings
for any condition.
Page 7 of 7
§ 3.03 AMA Guides Chapter 2: Practical Application of the Guides
One final note about the use of the AMA Guides 5th edition: Labor Code § 4660(b)(1) and in 2012 under SB 863 in
Labor Code § 4660.1 adopt the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides 5th edition, and there is no
language in the statutes that allow for adoption of the descriptions and measurements of any other edition. So any
adoption of a 6th edition of the AMA Guides would have to occur by legislative mandate. Fortunately, for practicing
workers’ compensation attorneys in California, this never occurred. The 6th Edition of the AMA Guides resulted in a
total “paradigm shift” to quote some commentators about that edition. The 6th Edition essentially uses a Diagnosis
Related Estimate method for all impairments with a default of a middle WPI rating for each with up to +2 WPI or –2
WPI variation for effects of an impairment on ADL functioning. Moreover, the definition of what constitutes an ADL
is different in the 6th Edition compared to that in the 5th Edition.
In fact, the only change to the determination of permanent disability that is permitted without legislation would be
the FEC adjustment, which can change based upon empirical evidence and adoption by the Division of Workers’
Compensation Administrative Director [see Labor Code § 4660]. In SB 863, Labor Code § 4660.1 eliminates the use
of FEC adjustment factors and substitutes one adjustment factor of 1.4 for all parts of body that are ratable under
the AMA Guides.
Each edition of the AMA Guides is a consensus document, which means that medical specialists who are authors
or who are on the editorial board of the American Medical Association agree to the actual guidelines for determining
permanent impairment for each region of the body and how impairment ratings are calculated and combined. Each
edition of the AMA Guides do not include any commentary or discussion of any minority view of physicians on how
a particular impairment should be determined. This reflects a conflict between academic medicine and clinical
medicine on the day-to-day evaluation and treatment of patients.
A great example of the fact that the AMA Guides is a political document created by the consensus of academic
physicians is the difference between the frameworks of the 5th Edition and the 6th Edition of the Guides. The 5th
Edition of the Guides is based upon prior editions of the Guides and clarifies earlier versions where there were
disagreements between the consensus group or advances in science and medicine occurred that altered the way
impairments for specific conditions were calculated. The Sixth Edition and revised 6th Edition of the AMA Guides,
which will not be utilized in the California workers’ compensation system, completely changed the underlying
framework for how impairments are determined. The Sixth Edition builds upon a range of five diagnosis-related
estimates (DRE) for each impairment and defaults at the middle rating with an increase or decrease of a few WPI
percentages for aggravating or mitigating factors. The Sixth Edition also uses a framework of ADL functioning under
standards established by the World Health Organization (WHO), a European consensus group, rather than from
Table 1-2 on page 4 of the 5th Edition, which was based upon guidelines established in the United States. What’s
the difference? The business of medicine. Adopting the WHO standards for ADL functioning will enable the AMA to
market the Guides in Europe since the Guides have been used in the United States, New Zealand, Australia, and
Canada, as stated in the introduction of the 6th Edition.
In addition, all versions of the Guides are not based on any kind of clinical research or scientific studies. For
example, in the 5th Edition of the Guides, a person who has a recurrent hernia has a Class 2 impairment rating
under Table 6-9 of up to a 19% WPI which indicates that the person has to avoid heavy lifting with no other effect
on ADLs. In contrast, a person with a herniated lumbar disc with or without surgery has up to a 13% WPI
impairment rating based on Chapter 15, Table 15-3, DRE Category III rating. There is no empirical evidence that
any of these impairments make sense in the general population, especially when different medical conditions have
varying effects on a person’s personal and work activities. Who is to say that the person with a recurrent hernia is
worse off than a person with a bad back? There is virtually no research that justifies any of these impairment
ratings.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.04
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.04 AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta;
Chapter 4: The Cardiovascular System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapters 3
and 4. There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in
certain circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in
multiple chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 3: THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM: HEART AND AORTA
• HEART
• ARRYTHMIAS (e.g., ATRIAL FIBRILLATION)
• MYOCARDIAL INFARCTIONS (HEART ATTACKS)
• CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
• CORONARY BY-PASS SURGERY
• MITRAL, TRICUSPID, AORTIC, PULMONARY VALVE DISORDERS
• CARDIOMYOPATHIES
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 4: THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM: SYSTEMIC AND PULMONARY
ARTERIES
• HYPERTENSION
• ANEURYSMS
• THROMBOPHLEBITIS
• PULMONARY EMBOLISMS
• LEFT VENTRICULAR HYPERTROPHY (LVH)
• DEEP VEIN THROMBOSIS (DVT)
• RAYNAUD’S PHENOMENON
HEART DISEASE: AMA GUIDES, CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides Chapters 3 (heart/aorta) and 4 (cardiovascular system) are discussed together in this section. The
AMA Guides use the nationally recognized New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Classifications of
Cardiac Disease that are also used in Social Security disability cases. See Table 3-1 on page 26 that divides
cardiac conditions into four classes (Class I through Class IV). The determination of which class of cardiac disease
Page 2 of 9
§ 3.04 AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta; Chapter 4: The Cardiovascular
System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
a patient has depends upon the METs and treadmill results listed in Tables 3-2 and 3-3 on page 27, plus the effect
of the cardiac disorder on the patient’s ADLs in Table 1-2 on page 4.
Do not confuse an NYHA classification for heart disease from an impairment Class described in the Tables and
Figures in Chapter 3 of the AMA Guides. Most physicians who rate heart disease for WPI in workers’ compensation
cases do not pay much attention to the NYHA classification for heart disease; at least they rarely mention it in their
reports. What is more important is the type of heart disease, the Class of impairment from the appropriate Table
and the WPI rating within the Class.
METS (metabolic equivalent of tasks) means a multiple of metabolic energy while at rest and is used to assist a
physician in determining cardiac disease functional class based on exercise tolerance and cardiac symptoms. One
“MET” is the amount of energy a person expends while at rest that includes all of the autonomic activities such as
breathing, brain work and basic movement we do while we are at rest. So a man who weighs 154 lbs with a MET of
1.0 expends 1.2 kcal/minute. One calorie is the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of one cubic
centimeter of water one degree centigrade. He would expend 3 METS when walking about 2.7 miles per hour. A
person who can exert 5.0 METS can perform an 18-hole round of golf or can walk 3–4 miles per hour for 20
minutes. A person with a METS of 7.0 can run 4–5 miles per hour for 20 minutes.
So when you look at Table 3-2 on page 27 and you walk briskly or you regularly use a treadmill, you want to be
within a METS of 10 through 16. Most physicians consider a METS of 10 or greater “normal” cardiac function. A
METS of 7 or less means there is probably at least NYHA functional class II cardiac disease. Most cardiologists use
the 12 minute Bruce Protocol treadmill testing that is listed in Table 3-2 where you start at 1.7 mile per hour at a
10% grade (steepness or incline of the treadmill) and every three minutes for a total test time of 12 minutes, the
speed and incline of the treadmill increases with a maximum speed of 4.2 miles per hour at a 16% grade. If you
have never had a treadmill test, you will see how much work it is to walk 4.2 mph at a 16% grade for three minutes
if you have a sedentary lifestyle. You would appreciate anyone with heart disease trying to do this, which is why the
Bruce protocol is widely used in California and throughout the nation. Under the Bruce protocol, a person has a
NYHA Class I cardiac condition if exertion is > 6 minutes and has to stop before 12 minutes; Class II if exertion is
3–6 minutes; Class III if 1 to 2 minutes; and Class IV is < 1 minute.
A cardiologist or internist can always tell when a patient is lying about his or her being in good physical condition.
The first question that is answered during a stress treadmill using the Bruce protocol is when does a patient hit 90%
of his or her maximum heart rate during the 12 minute treadmill test? Your maximum heart rate is 224 minus your
age times 90% [(224 – age) x .90]. If a patient hits 90% of their predicted maximum heart rate in 3 minutes of a 12
minute Bruce protocol, it means he or she is probably a couch potato or has serious heart trouble. The second
question is how long does it take for the patient to reach 100 beats per minute (bpm) after reaching 90% of the
predicted maximum heart rate? The recovery to under 100 bpm should occur in less than 2 minutes post-exercise
treadmill. So a 60-year-old man’s maximum predicted heart rate would be 148 bpm [224 − 60 = 164 × .90 = 147.6 =
148 bpm. An athlete would hit 90% of his or her maximum heart rate after 12 minutes under the Bruce protocol.
This is why there are other nationally accepted stress treadmill tests that you can see on Table 3-2 on page 27 of
the AMA Guides. The Brue protocol still remains the gold standard for most patients to determine heart health.
In addition, an ECG or electro-cardiogram during a stress treadmill test can determine the existence of any
arrhythmias as well as potential life-threatening cardiac conditions including coronary artery disease.
You can have a case in which the injured worker has more than one ratable cardiac condition. A person could have
coronary heart disease (Table 3-6a, page 36), an arrhythmia such as atrial fibrillation (Table 3-11, page 56) and
cardiomyopathy (Table 3-9, page 47). These would be ratable separately and combined. In fact, a recent case
involves a probation officer who has prolonged QT syndrome (an arrhythmia) with hypertensive cardiovascular
disease (Chapter 4, Table 4-2, page 66) and had to have both an implanted cardiac defibrillator and a pacemaker.
Each condition has a separate Class and WPI rating within a class and then those WPI ratings are combined using
the Combined Values Chart.
Page 3 of 9
§ 3.04 AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta; Chapter 4: The Cardiovascular
System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
Page 28 of the AMA Guides describes specific aspects of heart function that are still relevant over 18 years after
the 5th Edition was published. Any test of functional capacity from a cardiac standpoint is sensitive to outside
factors such as age (e.g., a 20-year-old athlete vs. a 70-year-old sedentary woman), gender, and level of exercise
training. Left ventricular function is extremely important to evaluate any heart impairment. Left ventricular function
has two components—systolic function which the amount of blood that is pushed out into the aorta by each heart
beat and diastolic function which is how much the heart muscle relaxes between beats in order to fill with blood.
Systolic function is measured by one’s ejection fraction (EF) which is the percentage of blood the heart is able to
eject during one heartbeat. Normal EF is anything >0.50. EFs 0.40 to 0.50 indicate mild systolic dysfunction; EFs
0.30 to 0.40 indicates moderate systolic dysfunction, and an EF < 0.30 is severe systolic dysfunction. We more
commonly see in our cases the concept of diastolic dysfunction which has a direct link to congestive heart failure.
This occurs when the diastolic pressure is high which shows evidence of elevated ventricular filling pressure but the
systolic pressure is normal with no valve problems. EKG and cardiac Doppler studies have become the tests of
choice to diagnose diastolic dysfunction and some AME cardiologists consider diastolic dysfunction as evidence of
“heart trouble” or as a precursor for heart trouble for safety member presumptions.
When you review a workers’ compensation claim that involves the heart, you must pay very close attention to the
laboratory results from an initial hospitalization by a treating physician and the tests an AME or PQME orders at the
time of an MMI examination. Positive troponin blood tests in medical records when a person was hospitalized with
an alleged heart attack confirm damage to the heart muscle and confirms the existence of a myocardial infarction.
This fact alone places a patient into a Class 2, 3, or 4 cardiac impairment rating. Also at the time of an MMI
examination, evidence of hypokinesis from a cardiac ultrasound test demonstrates permanent damage to the heart
muscle. Hypokinesis means that the heart muscle is not contracting properly due to damage to an area of heart
muscle where a heart attack had occurred. This could and does affect a patient’s ejection fraction and systolic
pressure. Also, abnormal liver function or kidney function can also have a cardiac origin, especially as a result of
major organ shut-down during open heart surgery, insufficient cardiac output, or as a result of a heart attack.
Counsel should always ask a treating or evaluating physician about any laboratory abnormalities that exist at the
time of an MMI examination. Liver and kidney abnormalities that result in permanent impairment are separately
rated from the ratable cardiac impairments.
As stated above, there is a direct link between a patient who has diastolic dysfunction and congestive heart failure
(CHF). Congestive heart failure occurs when the heart is unable to pump enough blood to flow into the body. The
signs and symptoms include the build-up of fluid (edema) in the lower extremities with swelling in the ankles and
legs and severe shortness of breath. Usually the treatment begins with a “water pill” or diuretic such as Lasix but
that therapy is only temporary and the concern is to find the cause of the CHF if possible and to directly treat the
cause of it. Any patient who develops CHF will automatically fall into a Class 4, 50% to 100% WPI rating for the
various heart conditions in AMA Guides Chapter 3. These are seriously ill patients who need intensive and
immediate treatment and who rarely have a good outcome.
A “normal” person has the following normal cardiac profile:
1. Cardiovascular system has normal measurements on standard protocol ECG and other testing;
2. Person can perform all activities of daily living without cardiac symptoms;
3. Person has cardiac reserve capacity that allows comfortable exercise without the development of major
cardiovascular symptoms;
4. Person has normal left ventricular ejection fraction (i.e. >0.50);
5. Person is able to complete at least 80% of age and gender predicted functional aerobic activities during
exercise stress testing.
As a side note for anyone who reads this part of the guidebook, if you are over 40 years of age, you should have a
base-line ECG, cardiac Doppler study and exercise treadmill test. This is good preventative medicine and can
assist you as you age with repeat testing every year or two.
Page 4 of 9
§ 3.04 AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta; Chapter 4: The Cardiovascular
System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
Tables 3-5 through 3-11 on pages 30, 36, 38, 42, 47, 52, and 56, respectively, use the NYHA classification system
on a disease specific basis. Tables 3-6a and 3-6b on page 36 are the most notable for workers’ compensation
purposes because they include four classes of whole person impairments for coronary heart disease. Note the
range within each of the four classes, especially Class 4 with a range of 50% WPI to 100% WPI.
Whole person impairments for cardiac arrhythmias are listed in Class 1 through Class 4 in Table 3-11 on page 56
with the same ranges of variance within each class as for coronary heart disease. Table 3-12 is a helpful chart on
page 60 that summarizes the cardiac impairments in AMA Guides Chapter 3 and refers you to the proper section
and tables to determine impairments under those classes of cardiac disorders.
Make sure a treating or evaluating physician correctly classifies a person’s cardiac disease using the NYHA criteria
listed in AMA Guides Table 3-1, page 26. The person’s cardiac condition must be matched to both the proper
NYHA classification in Table 3-1 and to the appropriate impairment rating for the actual cardiac diagnosis in the
other tables in Chapter 3. For a person who has a heart attack and coronary by-pass surgery, the impairment rating
would be found in AMA Guides Tables 3-6a and 3-6b, page 36. For a person who has developed an arrhythmia, the
impairment rating would be found in Table 3-11, page 56. Development of the medical-legal record should cause
counsel to focus upon the selected NYHA classification in a case first and then an evaluation of the impairment
rating using the appropriate table, class, and rating within a class, including how a physician determined each
conclusion. This is especially true because in practice, we are seeing some physicians skirt the NYHA classification
in most cases as stated above.
In virtually all workers’ compensation cases that involve the heart, it is strongly recommended that you read each
example in the AMA Guides Chapter 3 to see if a given case is similar to any of the examples. This will assist you in
preparing to cross-examine an evaluating or treating physician on a WPI rating with which you disagree. Since
there are no guidelines for how ADLs are affected in each Class of impairments in all tables in Chapter 3, your
knowledge of an accurate history and current complaints of the injured worker are essential, along with the types
and number of medications the injured worker has been prescribed. All of these factors, along with the permanent
objective medical findings for each class of impairment, must exist in order to obtain the most accurate rating for
heart disease.
Counsel needs to become familiar with the diagnostic criteria for heart diseases including coronary heart disease,
valvular heart disease, congenital heart disease, cardiomyopathies, pericardial heart disease, and arrhythmias. All
of these disorders of the heart are ratable, and the AMA Guides have specific tables and figures for them.
In addition, since these cardiac disorders require significant medications for treatment, counsel should also be
aware of potential side effects of some medications that may cause independent ratable factors of impairment,
especially anti-coagulant medications.
The most common heart condition we see in our cases involves coronary heart disease, or more accurately
coronary artery disease (CAD). This involves clogging of the arteries, or more formally, due to arteriosclerosis and
narrowing of the coronary arteries. Blood flow is restricted and the person is of high risk of a piece of the plaque to
flow off and cause a total occlusion of an artery causing a heart attack or myocardial infarction. When there is
reduced blood flow due to stenotic (narrowed) arteries, the heart pumps harder in order to pump the blood through
the body. Imagine yourself using a 5-pound dumbbell for one hour a day for one year with your left hand and arm
doing curls and not using the right hand or arm at all. In one year if you measure the circumference of your biceps
muscle, your left side will be quite larger than the right biceps circumference. The same thing is happening to
people who have left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH)—an enlarged left lower chamber of the heart becomes that way
because of the harder work it is doing to move the blood through the body due to narrowed arteries. Table 3-6a is
the most often table used in Chapter 3 of the AMA Guides since coronary artery disease is a common condition we
see in our cases.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Page 5 of 9
§ 3.04 AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta; Chapter 4: The Cardiovascular
System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
Many attorneys allege injury to the heart but fail to make sure that a treating physician, usually outside the
workers’ compensation arena, or an evaluating physician orders a Doppler Study or cardiac ultrasound
testing. This is a non-invasive ultrasound test that costs between $250.00 and $300.00 that can detect
enlargement of the left ventricle and leaky heart valves. Equally lacking in the workers’ compensation arena
are ultrasound studies of the carotid arteries that can detect narrowing of the main arteries to the brain.
Leaky heart valves and narrowed carotid arteries place people at high risk of having a stroke, and these
inexpensive tests can be life-saving and provide valuable information about potential WPI ratings.
The only difference between a Class 3 and Class 4 rating for CAD and each of the other cardiac conditions in
Chapter 3 is that a Class 3 patient has a METS of > 5 but < 7; a Class 4 has a METS of < 5 with congestive heart
failure. Anyone with a Class 4 cardiac impairment rating has between a 50% WPI and 100% WPI; these people are
very ill and are presumptively entitled to social security disability benefits.
The second most common cardiac condition we see in our cases involves arrhythmias which is on page 56 of the
AMA Guides. In fact, this author successfully prosecuted a workers’ compensation case that involved a workers’
compensation defense attorney who had to retire due to severe atrial fibrillation that was aggravated by the stress
of being a workers’ compensation defense attorney. An arrhythmia simply refers to a heartbeat that is generated at
a site other than the sinus node. Some people who have an arrhythmia have no symptoms and experience no
impairment. Others have syncope (fainting or loss of consciousness), weakness and fatigue, palpitations, dizziness,
lightheadedness, chest heaviness, and shortness of breath, or any combination of the foregoing.
People who suffer from arrhythmias generally are at risk of having a stroke so many patients need to be on
anticoagulant medication such as warfarin (Coumadin). Sometimes an electro-ablation of the area of the heart that
is causing the arrhythmia is necessary to control or stop the arrhythmia. In other cases, a pace maker is installed
and in rare cases a cardioverter-defibrillator is surgically implanted in the patient’s chest, for those who are at risk
for sudden cardiac death. We see atrial fibrillation, sinus bradycardia (too slow heartrate), and ventricular
tachycardia (too fast heartrate) in our cases.
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM, SYSTEMIC AND PULMONARY ARTERIES—CHAPTER 4
AMA Guides Chapter 4 covers disorders of the systemic and pulmonary arteries. Of note to workers’ compensation
cases is Table 4-2 on page 66, criteria for rating hypertension cases. Again, there are four classes of whole person
impairments depending upon the severity of the hypertension and its effect on a person’s ADLs. Those classes
have the same ranges within each class as do the cardiac tables in AMA Guides Chapter 3. Note there are three
stages of hypertension listed in Table 4-1 on page 66 that are indexed to the severity of the disease in the WPI
listings.
Notice in Table 4-1, page 66, Classification of Hypertension in Adults, a high systolic or a high diastolic blood
pressure is sufficient for a diagnosis of hypertension; thus, you do not need both readings to be “high” in order to
have the diagnosis. There has to be at least three separate “high” readings at different times in order to justify a
diagnosis of hypertension. This criteria has changed in the years since the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides was
published. Most physicians now believe that only two separate “high” readings at different times justifies a diagnosis
of hypertension. For Stage 1 hypertension, a person only needs a systolic blood pressure reading of 140–159 or a
diastolic blood pressure reading of 90–99.
The diagnostic criteria for hypertension listed on page 66 of the AMA Guides are outdated and obsolete. The three
stages of hypertension listed in Table 4-1 are based on the Joint National Committee-6 (JNC-6). The JNC consists
of medical experts in research and clinical practice who regularly meet and make recommendations to the medical
community on issues involving cardiovascular medicine. The recommendations of the JNC have significant
influence on the day to day practice of medicine and can be considered a national standard of care. On December
28, 2013, the JNC-8 arrived at a consensus-based revision of the diagnosis and recommended treatment of
Page 6 of 9
§ 3.04 AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta; Chapter 4: The Cardiovascular
System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
hypertension. Due to the very high population of people with hypertension the JNC-8 developed the Hypertension
Management Algorithm that is a guide for physicians on how to treat hypertension. Current research shows that
there is less than 50% medication adherence for patients who are diagnosed with hypertension and who are
prescribed anti-hypertensive medications.
The current standard is to consider any person who is under 60 years of age to have hypertension if the blood
pressure is greater than or equal to 150/90. If a person has blood pressure of greater than or equal to 160/100 then
the person has what essentially is a “stage 3 hypertension” status using Table 4-1. There is no longer a stage 2
hypertension consideration. Any person who has blood pressure regularly between 140–149/80–89 have
“prehypertension” which is not ratable for permanent impairment but is a warning sign. The standard medical
treatment for hypertension today is for a physician to prescribe a diuretic such as hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) or an
ACE inhibitor, or an Angiotensin Receptor Blocker (ARB) or a calcium channel blocker (CCB), or a combination of
the foregoing. Counsel must be aware that these medications alone and in combination can have significant side
effects which may cause ratable impairment.
COMMON MISTAKE:
The American Heart Association has its own diagnostic criteria
for cardiovascular hypertension which is more stringent than the
JNC-8 criteria. A person is considered hypertensive if either one
of their systolic and diastolic numbers are 140/80 or higher.
This is quite controversial since if this standard is widely
adopted, the need for anti-hypertensive medication will sky-
rocket across large age groups. Long-term use of any
medication has its own risks. In the context of the workers’
compensation system, counsel needs to ask physicians who
diagnose cardiovascular hypertensive disease what diagnostic
standard the physician is using as a basis for the diagnosis. It
appears at the time of publication of this edition of this
Guidebook that the American Heart Association diagnostic
criteria for hypertension has been adopted by most clinical
physicians. That does not necessarily mean that all patients
who have slightly higher than 120 systolic or 80 diastolic blood
pressure need medication for hypertension.
The newest guidelines for the diagnosis of hypertension is from
the American Heart Association. Counsel should become aware
of the AHA standards since they are widely accepted and
utilized for treatment for hypertension related conditions. The
current AHA Guidelines as of November 2017 are as follows:
BLOOD
PRESSURE
CATEGORY:
SYSTOLI
C
(mmHG)
and
/or
DIASTOLI
C
(mmHG)
NORMAL
<120
and
<80
ELEVATED
120–129
mm
and
<80
HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE HTN-
STAGE 1
130–139
or
80–89
HIGH BLOOD
140 or
or
90 or
Page 7 of 9
§ 3.04 AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta; Chapter 4: The Cardiovascular
System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
PRESSURE HTN-
STAGE 2
HIGHER
higher
HYPERTENSIVE
CRISIS
180 or
HIGHER
and
/or
120 or
higher
We use Tables 4-1 and 4-2 extensively in our cases, and you need to become very familiar with the rating
methodology for hypertension. Undiagnosed, untreated or improperly treated hypertension can cause left
ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and ultimately heart failure (HF). Left ventricular hypertrophy is enlargement of the
left lower chamber of the heart from which oxygen enriched blood flows from the heart to the body. LVH is a form of
cardiomyopathy that is simply an “enlarged heart” in layman terms. A Class 3 and Class 4 hypertension WPI rating
requires the existence of poorly controlled or long standing hypertension with severe consequences.
LVH takes from six months to two years to form because of non-diagnosed hypertension, poor hypertension control
or a patient’s non-compliance with medication. In fact, up to 50% of hypertensive people in the United States do not
comply with their hypertension medication regiment. The term “poor hypertension control” includes patients who are
medication compliant but still show clinically significant hypertension despite multiple medications. This is called
“malignant hypertension.” Heart failure means that the heart is not pumping blood hard enough to circulate blood
properly in the body, causing fluid build-up in the legs (edema) and ultimately in the lungs and eventually leading to
kidney failure. This is why a Class 3 WPI rating is between 30% WPI and 49% WPI and a Class 4 WPI rating is
between 50% WPI and 100% WPI. These are very sick individuals who have serious hypertension and end organ
disease as a result of it.
A recent case was quite vexing where the injured worker had normal blood pressure with four medications but still
has a Class 4 impairment rating under Table 4-2. This was due to end organ damage including irreversible LVH and
abnormal kidney function. Notice that Classes 1, 2, and 3 all have “and” and “or” separating some of the criteria,
and a physician must provide an explanation of how and why an injured worker falls within one class or another and
what WPI rating within a class applies with an explanation of why a specific WPI rating applies in the case.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many physicians do not discuss how and why a patient is placed within a class of impairment. For example,
any Class 4 cardiovascular impairment is between 50% and 100% WPI. The AMA Guides do not provide
any real guidelines as to where a physician should assign a given impairment rating within a class. When
counsel deposes a physician, the doctor must describe how he or she arrived at a specific WPI rating—what
was it based on?
For safety members (police, sheriff, and firefighters), pursuant to Labor Code § 3212 et. seq., there is the “heart
trouble” presumption, among others. This means that any heart trouble is presumed to be work related. Labor Code
§ 4663(e) provides the anti-attribution of non-industrial factors to apportionment of permanent disability for certain
specified safety members. This means you cannot apportion permanent disability to non-industrial factors and
probably also means you cannot apply Benson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Board [(2009) 170 Cal. App. 4th 1535,
89 Cal. Rptr. 3d 166, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113] in these cases, at least according to some recent non-published
WCAB panel decisions.
So what do you do with a safety member case where Labor Code §§ 3212 and 4663(e) apply and the injured
worker has hypertension with LVH? Does the injured safety member get the heart trouble presumption? Since
hypertension itself is not “heart trouble,” should the WPI rating for hypertension be subject to apportionment due to
non-industrial factors such as a smoking history, diabetes, obesity, and family history? Both statements are correct,
and a judge would have to parcel out impairment for the heart trouble that is not subject to apportionment under
Benson or other applications of Labor Code § 4663, and the apportionment to other factors would apply to the
Page 8 of 9
§ 3.04 AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta; Chapter 4: The Cardiovascular
System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
impairment from the hypertension alone. How would this be accomplished? There is no case law on this subject yet
but hypothetically, a physician could rate the heart trouble from the LVH using Table 3-9 on page 47,
Cardiomyopathies, and the hypertension as a Class 1, 2, or 3 separately under Table 4-2. Then the physician
applies principles of apportionment under Labor Code § 4663 to the hypertension portion of the WPI ratings only,
leaving out the WPI rating for the LVH.
Other arguments may prevail, one by the defense whose argument is that the LVH is caused by the hypertension
and, therefore, the whole thing should be subject to apportionment and the anti-attribution clause of Labor Code
§ 4663 does not apply at all to either the LVH or the hypertension. The applicant’s side would argue that the LVH
and the hypertension that caused it are both so intertwined that you cannot parcel out apportionment between the
LVH and the hypertension with reasonable medical probability. Case law will eventually have to resolve this issue
along with precise medical analysis by a competent medical-legal evaluator.
Interestingly Table 4-4 on page 74 covers impairments of the upper extremity due to peripheral vascular disease.
So does Table 16-17 on page 498 in Chapter 16, the Upper Extremities chapter. When you compare the two tables
against each other, it is confusing which table is applicable in a given case. Notice that Raynaud’s phenomenon is
covered in AMA Guides Chapter 4 and also in AMA Guides Chapter 16, Table 16-17 on upper extremities. If you
have a case involving vascular insufficiency and possible amputation, then you want to refer to Table 4-4 and the
explanation and examples. Remember, everything in the AMA Guides is indexed to how a disorder affects a
person’s activities of daily living in Table 1-2 on page 4. Remember, too, that you have to multiply the upper
extremity impairment times .6 to obtain the whole person impairment rating. So deep vein thrombosis for an upper
extremity is rated in these tables in two different chapters. Counsel should make sure a physician reviews both
tables to see which WPI rating is the most accurate and why.
Disorders and impairments of the lower extremities due to peripheral vascular disease are included in Table 4-5 on
page 76 and in Table 17-38 on page 554 in Chapter 17, The Lower Extremities, and these two tables are identical.
There can be a workers’ compensation case involving post-traumatic amputations or aggravation of diabetes
resulting in loss of toes, feet, and legs that would be covered under this chapter. If the impairment is to a lower
extremity due to peripheral vascular disease, regardless of which chapter you use to rate it, you have to multiply the
lower extremity impairment rating by .4 to obtain the WPI rating. Table 4-7 on page 82 also has a helpful summary
of systemic and pulmonary artery cardiovascular impairments. The medical term “claudication” means lameness
(which can be neurogenic, discogenic, or vascular).
A person who has both a heart condition and vascular disease such as hypertension receives potentially two
separate impairment ratings from the AMA Guides. For example, a patient who had a heart attack (myocardial
infarction) due to coronary heart disease (CHD) or who develops an arrhythmia will receive an impairment rating
from AMA Guides Chapter 3, Tables 3-6a and 3-6b, page 36, for the CHD or Table 3-11, page 56, for the
arrhythmia, and a separate impairment from Chapter 4, Tables 4-1 and 4-2, page 66, for the hypertension. The
impairment ratings from the two separate chapters (e.g., Chapter 3 for the CHD, and Chapter 4 for the
hypertension) are combined using the Combined Values Chart. However, a patient who develops cardio-vascular
hypertensive disease that results in left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) would be rated under Chapter 4, with a Stage
3 or 4 hypertension rating only.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many panel QME physicians do not think they are “allowed” to assign separate ratings for CHD,
arrhythmias, and hypertension in a severely disabled patient. That is not true, and this is why the Combined
Values Chart is useful in cases like this. Some physicians think they can only rate the most severe condition
and the rest overlap with the severe condition, which is not true.
Page 9 of 9
§ 3.04 AMA Guides Chapter 3: The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta; Chapter 4: The Cardiovascular
System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
Table 4-6 has WPI ratings for pulmonary hypertension, which is different than cardiovascular hypertensive disease.
Pulmonary hypertension is a serious condition that affects the right ventricle of the heart and is diagnosed by chest
X-ray and pulmonary artery pressure (PAP less than 40 mm Hg is normal). Pulmonary hypertension can be
associated with chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD) from cigarette smoking and other lung diseases. In the
context of work-related injuries, a pulmonary embolism resulting from surgery that is from a work related injury can
cause pulmonary hypertension. The examples in this section of the AMA Guides involve cases where the person
has COPD or a pulmonary embolism.
The FEC adjustment for all heart related impairments in Chapter 3 of the AMA Guides is a [5], and the FEC
adjustment for all of the Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries in AMA Guides Chapter 4 is also a [5], except for
pulmonary circulation disease, which has an FEC adjustment of [7]. See page 2-2, of the 2005 PDRS. Remember,
the adjustment factor for all parts of body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40%
increase of each WPI rating.
It has become clear that use of AMA Guides Chapters 3 and 4 has resulted in higher permanent disability ratings
overall compared with the 1997 Rating Schedule work restriction method of determining PD once everyone uses
these AMA Guides chapters under the 2005 and 2013 PDRS. The AMA Guides do not describe rules governing
apportionment or causation in any of the individual chapters involving conditions that result in permanent
impairments. See the discussion of when a risk factor becomes causative in Chapter 8 of this guidebook. The two
published appellate cases on apportionment, Escobedo and Gatten, involve orthopedic conditions (the knee and
the lumbar spine, respectively) and there is no published appellate case that involves apportionment in a case that
involves internal medical conditions such as heart disease or hypertension.
The physician (either the treating or evaluating) must justify where within a class a given case exists. Suppose an
injured employee has back, heart, and diabetes impairments. The heart and diabetic conditions independently
result in ratings within two separate classes or ranges of impairments in AMA Guides Chapters 3 and 10,
respectively. The AME or PQME would have to determine where this case belongs within each class range (low,
middle, or upper end). He or she could assign a mid-range WPI rating for the heart since the applicant had coronary
by-pass surgery with moderate exertional residuals. The AME or PQME could also assign a WPI on the upper end
of a rating range since the applicant had retinopathy and peripheral neuropathies from the diabetes.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.05
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 5.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 5: THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
• ASTHMA
• LUNG CANCER
• EMPHYSEMA
• ASBESTOSIS
• SLEEP APNEA
• HYPERSENSITIVITY/ALLERGIES/REACTIVE AIRWAY DISEASE
• CHEMICAL EXPOSURES
• DYSPNEA (SHORTNESS OF BREATH)
• COVID-19
The interesting aspect of Chapter 5, The Respiratory System is that evaluating and treating physicians in our
workers’ compensation cases do not like the way this chapter is set up for evaluating lung-related impairments. This
is because there really is no correlation between the pulmonary function tests required for WPI ratings and how a
given lung condition actually affect ADL (and work) functioning.
Tables 5-2 through 5-7b provide the predicted limits of different pulmonary functions for men and women, and
actual readings of these functions for patients with suspected lung disorders are compared to predicted normals for
height and age in these tables since lung capacity changes as we age, depending on how tall we are and whether
we are men or women.
Table 5-8 on page 101 (called a “physical work intensity to oxygen consumption”) is interesting for the METS for
light to arduous work activities as discussed in § 3.04, above. A creative physician may use this table to say, for
example, that the injured worker has a METS limitation to “moderate work,” which is a METS of 4 or less because
of an industrially related heart or lung or other condition. Using Table 3-6a or any other heart disease related table
in Chapter 3 of the Guides would result in a Class 4 WPI impairment between 50% and 100%. Be careful with this,
though, since there has to be significant objective medical findings to support a conclusion that a person is limited
to exertion of less than 4 METS on a permanent basis due to an industrial injury.
Page 2 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
AMA Guides Chapter 5 covers disorders of the respiratory system, including listings for asthma, lung cancer, sleep
apnea, dyspnea (shortness of breath on exertion), and other probably non-work related conditions. There is an
asthma severity listing in Table 5-9 on page 104 and the whole person impairment listings for asthma in Table 5-10
also on page 104. See the discussion about asthma cases below. Most of the earlier tables in AMA Guides Chapter
5 involve the normal and abnormal ratings for pulmonary functions that are needed by all physicians who evaluate
forced expiratory volumes in one second (FEV-1) and the other nationally accepted measures of pulmonary
function.
For patients who suffer from sleep apnea, there are no ratings of whole person impairments because there is no
consensus among the specialists who wrote the AMA Guides chapter. The authors state in section 5.6 on page 105
of the AMA Guides that a sleep specialist should evaluate the severity of the effects of obstructive sleep apnea on a
patient’s ADLs. The problem is that there is no clear definition of who a “sleep specialist” is. Once the AMA Guides
were adopted under Labor Code § 4660 in 2004, many so called “sleep specialists” came out of the woodwork and
claimed to be experts on sleep disorders, including sleep apnea. In reality, sleep apnea is a serious and dangerous
medical condition for which proper medical treatment is required. There are two kinds of sleep apnea—obstructive
and central. Obstructive sleep apnea is usually caused by obesity where the airway is blocked due to a neck
circumference that is greater than 17 inches or chest wall movements affect proper breathing. Central sleep apnea
is caused by a central nervous system condition such as traumatic brain injury. Sleep disorders in general are
discussed in Chapter 13, page 317 of the AMA Guides and § 3.13 of this guidebook.
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, or bronchiolitis obliterans are forms of what is called interstitial lung disease, and the
AMA Guides provide a separate rating mechanism than that which exists for asthma conditions. This is because
with most of the seven types of interstitial lung diseases, there are significant changes and destruction of lung
tissue as a result of these conditions. Long term exposures to certain chemicals can result in interstitial lung
disease, which, if untreated, becomes pulmonary fibrosis. A recent national emergence of lung diseases in workers
who are in the flavoring industry point to the unprotected or under-protected use of diacetyl (popcorn butter), which
is now known to cause destruction of alveoli that is located at the distal end of lung tissue where gas is exchanged
during breathing. These individuals have chronic coughing and loss of exertional capacities and may result in being
in need of bilateral lung transplantation surgery.
The most important table in AMA Guides Chapter 5 is Table 5-12 on page 107, which shows the overall whole
person impairment for the four classes of pulmonary function and exercise test results. Once you have the
conclusive data from a lung specialist or internist, you can read the chart and assign any applicable WPI ratings.
However, note the range within each of the four classes. You must make sure the testing was valid by the doctor or
technician and the results replicated by the treating and evaluating physicians.
The instructions for use of Table 5-12 do not indicate whether or not the physician provides only one overall WPI
rating, adds them or combines them if there are more than one ratable factor from the pulmonary function tests. For
example, in a recent diacetyl case, the injured worker has a Class 4, 75% WPI rating for FEV-1 since her score was
19% of predicted (Class 4 is anything less than 40%). In addition, she had a Class 2 FVC (forced vital capacity)
impairment of 11% WPI rating, which the AME added to the 75% WPI rating. The AME explained how and why he
added the two and assigned an 86% WPI overall rating by indicating that the injured worker not only could not
breathe properly, she could not push gas out of her lungs based on the two tests, which measured two separate
lung functions—lung volume and time to exchange air. She also had a third problem with the FEV-1/FVC ratio being
just greater than the lower limit of normal.
This patient is on a bilateral lung transplant list since her exposure to diacetyl lasted for eight years undetected and
untreated. A rating of 75% WPI in this case adjusted for DFEC to 100% disability without regard for age or
occupation since the DFEC adjustment factor was a category 5 under the 2005 PDRS. She did not need the
additional 11% WPI for the abnormal FVC rating to obtain a 100% permanent disability award. The purpose of this
example is to advise counsel that you must read laboratory results carefully and learn to understand the
significance of their meaning.
Page 3 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
COMMON MISTAKE:
Make sure evaluating and treating physicians pay close attention to laboratory results. It is not unusual for
medical-legal evaluators to forget to incorporate their own laboratory results, which can result in a missed
WPI rating. For example, in a case that involved quadruple coronary by-pass surgery (CABG), the applicant
had kidney and liver failure during the surgery which resulted in abnormal test results for those organ
functions years later. The AME who ordered the tests and attached the results to his AME report failed to
include those results in his discussion of permanent impairment since abnormal kidney and liver function
have separate factors that have WPI ratings.
Table 5-13 on page 112 lists a summary of general, restrictive, obstructive, and cancer respiratory disorders and a
quick reference to the proper tables to determine a rating. The authors of Chapter 5 of the AMA Guides in the text,
page 107, second column recognize the fact that there are situations where pulmonary function tests are normal but
a lung condition nevertheless affects a person’s ADL functioning. The authors state that in these limited cases, a
physician may assign a WPI “rating based on the extent and severity of pulmonary dysfunction and the inability to
perform ADLs. Measured losses of pulmonary function and corresponding impairment classes, result in a loss in the
ability to perform some ADLs.” The physician can use these associations as a reference and must give a detailed
description with supporting evidence of the type of pulmonary impairment and its impact on ADL functioning is
required. The authors refer to a lung condition called “bronchiectasis,” which is scarring of lung tissue from multiple
upper respiratory infections or chronic bronchitis.
There is a special need to discuss asthma cases and how the authors of the AMA Guides determine impairments
as a result of occupationally related asthma disease. We have seen many asthma cases over the years and will
continue to do so, and the method of rating permanent disability for asthma has changed dramatically from the
method utilized under the 1997 PDRS. The 1997 PDRS based permanent disability ratings for asthma on the
severity of the asthma and its effect on a person’s ability to exert himself or herself for work activities. A “limitation
from exposure to dust, fumes and particulates; heavy work and emotional stress” was a common work restriction for
someone with severe industrially related asthma. We have seen a number of industrially related asthma cases
since 2005 in which the evaluating or treating physician does not accurately or correctly evaluate impairment of the
condition under the AMA Guides. Section 11.3 of the 1997 PDRS indicated that a “slight” asthma permanent
disability rating was equivalent to a prophylactic restriction of “avoidance of the irritating substance.” Preclusion
from exposures to dust, fumes and particulates was assigned a 20% permanent disability rating. Under the 2005
and 2013 PDRS and the AMA Guides, the entire rubric is different and scientifically based.
Asthma is defined in Section 5.5 on page 102 of the AMA Guides as an inflammatory disease with episodic and
variable airway flow limitation and airway hyper-responsiveness. Symptoms include cough, sputum, wheeze, chest
tightness, or dyspnea (shortness of breath). There also has to be evidence of:
1. Reversible airflow obstruction or airway reactivity to a methacholine challenge, or
2. Histamine challenge if there is no airflow limitation but the patient has symptoms of asthma.
An asthma attack can be induced by exposure to dust, fumes, particulates; exercise, or emotional stress. The
authors of the AMA Guides do not discuss asthma attacks caused by emotional stress and very little is mentioned
about exercise induced asthma attacks.
A person’s airflow obstruction is usually caused by the inflammation of the bronchial and/or parenchma lung tissue
and is measured by a standard pulmonary function test. Airway hyper-responsiveness is tested by a methacholine
or histamine challenge where the physician exposes the patient to a known irritant and tests for the level of
concentration of the irritant at which the patient has a negative airway reaction and the FEV1 decreases by at least
20%.
The authors of the AMA Guides on page 102 acknowledge the significant existence of occupational asthma:
Page 4 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
Besides directly causing occupational asthma, work exposures can acutely exacerbate an underlying asthmatic
condition, which can subsequently return to pre-exposure baseline status with removal from exposure. Work
exposures can also cause a more permanent change in an underlying asthmatic condition, which can persist
even after removal from exposure … Occupational asthma can be caused by sensitizers or irritants.
Sensitizers are substances (like grain dust, paper dust, latex, di-isocynate, animal dander) that require a latency
period for the development of an asthmatic response. The authors of the AMA Guides also indicate that once there
is an onset of symptoms, there is a potential for a severe exacerbation or fatality upon further exposure. Over 50%
of asthma sufferers who have sensitized-induced asthma do not recover completely even after two or more years
since the last exposure.
Irritant-induced asthma is also known as “RADS” or “reactive airways dysfunction syndrome.” This is the type of
asthma that can occur with a single high level exposure to a highly irritating gas, fume, mist or vapor. For a
diagnosis of RADS, there has to be all of the following components:
1. Inhalation exposure to an acutely irritating substance.
2. Onset of asthmatic symptoms within 24 hours of exposure to the irritant with persistent respiratory
symptoms.
3. Functional abnormalities (airway hyper-responsiveness) for greater than three months without pre-existing
respiratory disease.
The AMA Guides 5th Edition, which was published in 2000, adopts national asthma testing standards in effect in
1993 by the ATS (American Thoracic Society). The ATS guidelines require proper testing to correctly diagnose
asthma as follows:
1. If the pre-bronchodilator FEV1 is above the lower limit of normal for a patient who has clinical symptoms of
asthma, then the physician is required to perform a methacholine challenge.
2. If the pre-bronchodilator FEV1 is below the lower limit of normal, then the degree of reversibility is assessed
with inhaled bronchodilator.
The reason for the distinction is because many sensitized-induced asthma patients will have below normal FEV1 as
a result of the asthmatic condition that is partially reversed with a bronchodilator, while other asthma patients who
have had irritant induced asthma will have significantly reduced (over 20%) FEV1 with exposure to a very low
concentration of the irritant (methacholine).
Table 5-9 utilizes a multifactorial method of assessing permanent impairment in the form of an “asthma severity
score,” which then is used to determine a WPI rating. The asthma severity score is derived from a score for optimal
drug treatment, plus a score for the post-bronchodilator FEV1 and/or the score for the degree of reversibility of the
FEV1 related to the amount of irritant in a challenge necessary to reduce the FEV1 by at least 20%.
In order to determine WPI from occupational asthma, the physician has to do the following:
1. Determine optimal medication if the Applicant is MMI.
2. Determine FEV1 post-bronchodilator.
3. Determine reversibility of FEV1 after a challenge.
4. Use Table 5-9 to calculate asthma severity score by adding scores for optimal medication, FEV1 post-
bronchodilator and/or FEV1 reversibility after a challenge.
5. Use Table 5-10 to convert asthma severity score to WPI taking into account a detailed description of how the
Applicant’s asthma affects his or her ADL functioning pursuant to Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA Guides.
First, determine which Class of permanent impairment and then state what WPI rating is within the Class.
State how and why the physician came to his or her conclusions for the asthma severity score, the WPI
Class and the actual WPI within the Class.
Page 5 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
In order to properly and completely apply Table 5-9 in an asthma case, you must make sure the physician reads
and follows the instructions in the footnotes below Table 5-9. These footnotes require the physician to add the
asthma severity scores for medication use, FEV1 post-bronchodilator and FEV1 reversibility if there was a
methacholine or histamine challenge. The footnotes under Table 5-9 states:
FEV1 indicates forced expiratory volume in the first second; PC20 is the provocative concentration that causes a
20% fall in FEV1. Add the scores for post-bronchodilator FEV1, reversibility of FEV1 (or PC20) and medication
use to obtain a summary severity score for rating respiratory impairment.
There is a second footnote under Table 5-9 that explains when to use the reversibility score and when to use the
provocative concentration score:
When FEV1 is greater than the lower limit of normal, PC20 should be determined and used for rating of
impairment; when FEV1 is less than 70% of the predicted, the degree of reversibility should be used; and when
FEV1 is between 70% of the predicted and the lower limit of normal, either reversibility or PC20 can be used.
The score for minimum medication use is added to the appropriate measurement criteria outlined above.
Finally, another footnote refers to the minimum medication use which should be determined by the testing physician
through previous records of exacerbation when medications have been reduced. Remember, “normal limits” of
FEV1 are determined by the pulmonary function tables, Tables 5-4a—Table 5-5b on pages 97 and 98 of the AMA
Guides.
Since the asthma severity scoring system reflected in Table 5-9 is based upon criteria established in 1993, it is
probable that newer medications and better testing methods of FEV1 may alter the scoring for asthma severity.
Physicians can determine the medication score by comparing new medications with the established ones listed in
Table 5-9. However, prednisone use is still the gold standard in severe cases. The methacholine challenge is still
used today in cases where a person has symptoms of asthma but whose pre-bronchodilator FEV1 is at the lower
limit of normal.
Once the physician determines the asthma severity score from Table 5-9, the score is then used to determine the
WPI Class due to the asthma using Table 5-10, which is substantially as follows:
Total
Asthma
Score
% WPI
Class
WPI Range
0
1
0%
1–5
2
10%–25%
6–9
3
26%–50%
10–11*
4
51%–100%
*A score of 10–11 means that there is uncontrolled asthma despite maximum treatment, a less than 50% post-
bronchodilator FEV1 despite over 20mg/day of prednisone.
The physician then establishes the WPI rating within a class by describing the effects of the asthma on the
Applicant’s ADL functioning. For example, in the school maintenance worker case in Ch. 7, § 7.05[1][d] of this
guidebook, based on Table 5-9, the Applicant had post-bronchodilator FEV1 of 69% of predicted (asthma severity
score of 2), FEV1 change (reversibility) of 10% where the bronchodilator did not work that well (asthma severity
score of 1), no challenge test (due to below normal FEV1 post-bronchodilator) (asthma severity score of 0) and
minimum medication use of “bronchodilator on demand and daily high dose inhaled corticosteroid or one to three
courses a year of systemic corticosteroid” (asthma severity score of 3):
Post-bronchodilator
FEV1:
Asthma severity score
= 2
FEV1 reversibility:
Asthma severity score
= 1
No methacholine
Asthma severity score
Page 6 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
challenge:
= 0
Optimal medication use:
Asthma severity score
= 3
Total asthma severity
score
= 6
The footnote below Table 5-10 states: “The impairment rating is calculated as the sum of the individual’s scores
from Table 5-9.” On Table 5-10, this Applicant has a Class 3 whole person impairment based upon the total score
from Table 5-9. The AME indicated that since the Applicant was able to return to work with the use of a cartridge
respirator, he was stable and compliant with his medication and his ADL functioning was fairly normal, he was
assigned a 26% WPI—the lowest end of a Class 3. The WPI rating of 26% resulted in a 58% permanent disability
award.
Some people have significant side effects from asthma medications, especially with prednisone. Corticosteroids like
prednisone can cause among other things weight gain, diabetes, osteoporosis, and a compromised immune
system. Any significant side effects from asthma medications should be separately assessed and rated by the
physician independently from the WPI rating for the asthma alone.
The problem with Table 5-10 is that there is no allowance for an impairment rating from 1% WPI to 9% WPI. This
means that many patients who have industrially caused episodic asthma attacks get a 0% WPI strict rating. Some
AME quality internal medicine and pulmonary specialists are aware of the “0 to 9% gap” in Table 5-10 and will
award up to 9% WPI even if the asthma severity score is not ratable under Table 5-10. Once case comes to mind
that went to trial in which a panel QME opined that the Applicant’s reactive airway disease was episodically
triggered by her exposure to fragrances such as perfumes and after-shave products her co-workers or members of
the public would wear, causing severe coughing spells and use of albuterol. However, the Applicant’s pulmonary
function tests were always normal when tested. So the PQME opined that due to the episodic asthma attacks that
were well documented over a five-year period resulted in a 3% WPI permanent impairment rating. Defendants did
not appeal that determination because the PQME explained the “flawed thinking of the authors of Chapter 5 since
many asthmatics have episodic attacks which means there is a risk of exposure and need for treatment without a
permanent impairment rating compared to the un-injured population who do not have the risk of exposure and
symptoms.”
COMMON MISTAKE:
Did you notice that Table 5-10 starts at 10% WPI? What happened to 1–9% WPI? This table is either
obsolete or is one of the 300 errors in the AMA Guides. A well-known AME pulmonary physician indicated in
his deposition that in many occupational asthma cases, he sees reactive airway disease in which a patient
may have severe shortness of breath and even life-threatening asthma attacks when exposed to an irritant
but otherwise has normal respiratory factors. He credibly testified in those cases, Table 5-10 does not fit well
for reactive airway disease cases because those patients generally have normal pulmonary function unless
they get exposed to the substance that sets off a reaction. He has assigned WPI ratings between 1% and
9% for those patients since severe symptoms and abnormal pulmonary function will occur during and after
an exposure event, but only temporarily. The risk of harm by repeat exposures justifies the WPI rating.
May a physician rate asthma using Table 5-12 instead of Tables 5-9 and 5-10? Probably. See page 112 of the AMA
Guides under “Obstructive Disorders” and scan across the page to page 113 under Degree of Impairment and for
asthma and other obstructive diseases, where you are referred to both Table 5-12 and to the asthma tables. In the
diacetyl case discussed above, the AME provided ratings using both methods and indicated that use of Table 5-12
was more accurate because it accounted for multiple pulmonary function abnormalities that applied in the case
even though it did not account for required medication use that is accounted for in the asthma tables.
Page 7 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
The FEC adjustment for all respiratory disorders including asthma, obstructive or restrictive disorders, or cancer
takes an FEC of [7]. See the 2005 PDRS, page 2-2. Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of body for
injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
COVID-19 INFECTION
DISCLAIMER: The following discussion is based on independent research by the author including sources
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and
School of Public Health. The discussion is not connected to or associated with the State of California
Department of Industrial Relations, the Division of Workers’ Compensation, or of the Workers’
Compensation Appeals Board. The discussion below is written solely by the author in his capacity as a
private citizen and as the Chairman of the Board of Directors of Friends Research Institute which has no
affiliation with COVID-19 research protocols as of August 2021.
Workers’ compensation claims filed by employees who allege they have contracted the COVID-19 infection while
on the job have occurred since the beginning of the pandemic in 2020. Liability for those claims may be readily
accepted for some employees who were at greater risk of contracting the infection at work, such as first responders.
Liability for non-first responder employees may be problematic, requiring proof based on reasonable medical
probability that it is more likely than not that the illness was due to work-related exposure to the virus or an outbreak
at a job site.
Counsel needs first to refer to the COVID-19 presumption statutes: Labor Code §§ 3212.86, 3212.87, and 3212.88.
These statutes originally were intended to sunset on January 1, 2023, but as of the publication deadline for this
edition of the Guidebook, the legislature has passed an extension bill to change the sunset dates of the following
three COVID-19 presumptions to January 1, 2024:
• Labor Code § 3212.86. This section applies to COVID-19 infections that occurred due to a work exposure
between March 19, 2020 and July 5, 2020. Counsel is advised to read the entire section in order to
determine how and when a case falls under this section.
• Labor Code § 3212.87. This presumption applies to safety members as defined in the statute to include
firefighters, paramedics, peace officers, and specific classes of health care workers. This statute applies to
exposures that cause a COVID-19 work related injury on or after July 6, 2020.
• Labor Code § 3212.88. This section creates a presumption when there is an “outbreak” of COVID-19
infections at a work site or exposure at various work sites of an employer. This applies to any employee
who does not meet the criteria in Section 3212.87 and the exposure is on or after July 6, 2020. An
“outbreak” means 4 or more employees if the number of employees is less than 100; or 4% or more of
employees if there are 100 or more employees at a location or locations where an employee is exposed
and contracts a COVID-19 infection at work.
Counsel should become familiar with the nomenclature involving the COVID-19 pandemic. The virus that causes
COVID-19 is referred to scientifically as “SARS-CoV-2” that represents the severe acute respiratory syndrome
novel coronavirus 2. The word “novel” means what it says—we have never seen this version of a coronavirus
before. Remember, the common cold is a result of various coronaviruses categorized together as “rhino-viruses.”
Once you get a cold, your body develops the antibody to that particular cold virus and you never get that version
again. Unfortunately, there are hundreds of rhino viruses going around and, like the influenza viruses, they quickly
mutate. In contrast, the term COVID-19 refers to the disease process caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Unfortunately, the SARS-CoV-2 virus has proven itself quite capable of mutations with each one named for its origin
or by letter. As of August 2022, the omicron bivalent variants (BA.4 and BA.5) are now causing over 80% of the
COVID-19 infections in the United States. The bivalent variants are demonstrating that it is as infectious as the
smallpox virus and spreads easily. During the last 33 months, there have been multiple variants of the original
SARS-CoV-2 virus, including the British variant, the South African variant, the California variant, Brazilian variant,
and the Indian variant, and so on. As long as the virus can attach itself to a live human cell, mutations of the virus
Page 8 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
will continue since viruses are not alive—they depend on living human cells to replicate and they don’t replicate
very efficiently.
The attractive depth-charge looking spherical illustration you see in the media of a SARS-CoV-2 virus is actually a
CDC (Centers of Disease Control and Prevention) artist’s rendition of what the actual virus looks like. A single virus
is 60-140 nanometers in diameter, where 1 nanometer is 1 billionth of a meter. The filaments of the corona are
proteins that latch on to human cells in the nose which triggers an immune system response. If a viral load is high,
the virus migrates into a person’s lungs which creates a severe autoimmune reaction. That war goes on inside
people’s lungs, and the detritus of the war results in destruction of alveoli and inflammation of lung tissue. CT scans
of infected patients reveal a finding called “ground glass opacities” which are usually seen in patients with severe
pulmonary fibrosis. Infections can cause an immune system response that results in inflammation of lung
parenchyma and deposits of detritus into the air sacs (alveoli). What should appear on a plain X-ray to be a clear
black outline of lung has clouds of haze. Patients have high fever, severe coughing, chest pain, and sometimes
severe loss of pulmonary function.
I. How Does the Virus Impact the Human Body?
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is proving that it can be a whole-body assault—potentially affecting other internal systems
besides the lungs and pulmonary system. Many COVID-19 patients have experienced liver function impairments
long after their acute physical symptoms have resolved. This was apparent after two negative assays for the SARS-
CoV-2 virus were obtained and the patients were discharged from active care. In fact, 12% of discharged patients
had heart failure. Additionally, there is evolving evidence that COVID-19 can affect the lungs, heart, brain, liver,
kidneys, endocrine system, and the blood system. At the writing of this update in early September 2022, there are
over 8,000,000 people worldwide who have been infected by the disease, resulting in the death of about 25% of
patients, based on epidemiologists at Johns Hopkins and the CSTE: Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists. Over 1,000,000 of those deaths occurred in the United States. That being said, 80% of the people
who become infected experience mild to moderate symptoms not bad enough to require hospitalization. On the
other side of that statistic, fifteen percent of cases are severe enough to require supplemental oxygen while five
percent require mechanical ventilation. Most infections cause symptoms to occur within five days of exposure,
lasting seven to fourteen days. People with the infection follow a bell-shaped curve reflecting how long they are ill.
II. Will the Disease Antibodies Protect the Patient in the Future?
One concern is whether and to what extent does a person develop immunity after a COVID-19 infection.
Vaccinations were developed worldwide and in the United States developed by Pfizer, Moderna, and Johnson and
Johnson with emergency use authorization by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Vaccinations have been
available since January 2021 for the general public. with eventual regulatory approval for children under 12 years of
age. There are continuing studies of the efficacy, safety, and duration of effect of all three vaccinations. There is
hope that the vaccinations have long-term effect to fight the virus. Children under 12 years of age are now allowed
to be vaccinated as more research on its efficacy, safety, and duration are established. The problem is that some
fully vaccinated people still get a COVID-19 infection called a “breakthrough infection.” This is because no vaccine
is 100% effective so when millions of people get vaccinated there will be some people who develop an infection
despite having had the full vaccination. So far that amounts to .0006% of people who are totally vaccinated which is
a very small number. The good news so far is that people who are fully vaccinated who develop symptoms of
COVID-19 infection have mild symptoms and very few have to be hospitalized or die from the infection. As of the
date of the publication deadline for this edition of this Guidebook, the FDA and CDC just approved a bivalent
vaccination that specifically targets the Omicron versions of SARs-Co-V2- virus along with the original version of the
virus.
Also, some newly developed anti-viral medications have been developed and approved for use in the United States.
For example, Paxlovid has been used recently and has shown effectiveness in reducing the severity of the disease,
especially in patients who are 65 years of age or older. However, early efficacy research indicates that there may
be a rebound of symptoms in some younger patients who are prescribed Paxlovid. The important point here is that
science is catching up to this virus with relatively quick development of more than one anti-viral medications
Page 9 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
specifically designed to treat the symptoms of COVID-19. As of September 2022 there are still a number of deaths
per day caused by this viral infection, and the pandemic is not yet over.
Another concern is that we do not know if the COVID-19 virus stays in a person’s body and can re-emerge later in
life. Some good examples include the herpes virus that starts as chicken pox in children and later in life, for some
patients, causing shingles. The virus that causes Hepatitis B causes liver cancer decades later. Even though the
Ebola epidemic in western Africa subsided in 2016, years later 40% of surviving patients developed blindness due
to a recurrence of that virus in the vitreous fluid of the patient’s eyes. We do not know how long the SARS-CoV-2
virus stays in the human body and what long-term damage to the body occurs.
We do know that some patients who had COVID-19 have permanent damage to their lungs. In the original SARS
epidemic, 33% of patients had long-term lung impairment after three years. The same percentage of patients
developed pulmonary fibrosis who had a MERS infection. So far, patients who had had COVID-19 and survived
have lost 20-30% of lung function. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that patients who survived COVID-19 get
annual lung scans and pulmonary function tests to see if there is progressive lung damage or improvement.
COVID-19 infection can affect a person’s heart both acutely and in some cases permanently. Emerging data
indicates that many COVID-19 patients suffer from blood clots, some so clinically significant that the loss of a leg
has occurred. Amid the cascading symptoms of the acute phase of COVID-19 infection in some patients, the heart
is deprived of oxygen due to reduced lung function, other body systems are affected, and the body responds with
an inflammatory systemic reaction. Blood clots can form, causing strokes, heart attacks, and venous embolisms.
Many COVID-19 patients will become lifetime cardiology and pulmonary patients. We do not know the long-term
prognosis of these patients.
In some COVID-19 patients, the immune system goes haywire and attacks the body’s organs, causing a hyper-
inflammatory response. In medicine, it is called a cytokine storm, which is an immune system response to an
infection including influenza, pneumonia, sepsis, and now COVID-19 infection. Cytokine storms can affect a
person’s lungs, heart, and kidneys. This occurs in some patients who are very ill from COVID-19.
III. Determining Industrial Causation
How can COVID-19 infections be deemed work related? For first responders such as police, sheriff deputies,
paramedic and firefighters, Labor Code §§ 3212.87 and 3212.8 provide a duty related presumption for heart,
pneumonia and for “blood-borne infectious disease” respectively. Section 3212.8(d) states: “For the purposes of this
section, ‘blood-borne infectious disease’ means a disease caused by exposure to pathogenic microorganisms that
are present in human blood that can cause disease in humans, including those pathogenic microorganisms defined
as blood-borne pathogens by the Department of Industrial Relations.” Since COVID-19 infection causes
pneumonia, the application of the presumption is clear for first responders. As to the question of whether COVID-19
is a “blood-borne infectious disease”, it is clear that while the infection begins in the lungs, the viral load becomes
systemic. Application of Labor Code § 3212.8 is in addition to the COVID-19 presumption specifically for first
responders in Labor Code § 3212.87 discussed above.
The causation analysis and rebuttable presumptions under Labor Code §§ 3212.86 and 3212.88 described above is
somewhat different for non-first responder employees, such as physicians, nurses, cleaning crews in hospitals,
grocery clerks and other employees who claim industrially related COVID-19 infection. The compensability of an
occupational disease generally requires an employee prove that it is medically probable that he or she experienced
a higher risk of work-related exposure causing the disease due to work duties compared to the risk of exposure to
the general public [see LaTourette v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1998) 17 Cal. 4th 644, 72 Cal. Rptr. 2d 217, 63
Cal. Comp. Cases 253 (heart attack while at a conference died of infection from heart surgery); Pacific Employers
Ins. Co. v. Industrial Acci. Com. (1942) 19 Cal. 2d 622, 7 Cal. Comp. Cases 71 (traveling salesman contracts Valley
Fever); Warner v. Industrial Acci. Com. (1935) 10 Cal. App. 2d 375, 51 P.2d 897 (employee contracts pneumonia
while traveling on business); Costco Wholesale Corp. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Rojas) (2010) 75 Cal. Comp.
Cases 1187 (writ denied) (hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by long-term employment as a meat
cutter/wrapper); ASR Construction v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (David) (2016) 81 Cal. Comp. Cases 210 (writ
Page 10 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
denied) (world traveling manager contracted tuberculosis); OneBeacon America Ins. Co. v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (Cole) (2016) 81 Cal. Comp. Cases 201 (writ denied) (Valley Fever for painter who dug ditches around
building’s foundation); County of Orange v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Azoulay) (2017) 82 Cal. Comp. Cases
378 (writ denied) (bacterial infection in colon spread into circulatory system creating presumption per Labor Code
§ 3212.8 for a juvenile correction officer)].
It is well settled law that for occupational diseases that can manifest symptoms for years, the WCAB retains
jurisdiction over temporary and permanent disability benefits despite a five-year statute of limitations. In General
Foundry Service v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Jackson), [(1986) 41 Cal. 3d 331, 228 Cal. Rptr. 243, 721 P.2d
124, 51 Cal. Comp. Cases 375], the Supreme Court of California stated in its decision: “We conclude that the
Board’s reservation of jurisdiction on the issue of permanent disability in the case of insidious, progressive diseases
serves to further the compensatory goals of the workers’ compensation system. On remand, the Board may
tentatively rate Jackson’s known permanent disability [from asbestos related illnesses] and order advances based
on that tentative rating. It may then reserve its jurisdiction for a final determination of permanent disability when
either (1) his condition becomes permanent and stationary, or (2) his permanent disability is total (100 percent) and
further deterioration would be irrelevant for rating purposes.”
The future application of General Foundry to workers’ compensation cases involving COVID-19 infections is
probable since the full epidemiology of the disease process is unknown since the virus that causes COVID-19 first
emerged in humans in December 2019. We are learning about the immediate effect of the disease process, but the
long-term effect of the condition is unknown. There are also legislative and administrative considerations involved
that are beyond the scope of this discussion. Counsel should be aware of the Governor’s Executive Orders and any
bills that are passed by the California legislature and signed into law that pertain to any presumption of
compensability for first responders and employees who perform essential government functions during the
pandemic. These presumptions, discussed above, all have sunset provisions and counsel needs to be aware of any
legislative extensions of the presumptions.
IV. Permanent Disability Rating of COVID-19 Injured Workers
So, how are COVID-19 patients potentially rated under the AMA Guides? First of all, the patient has to be declared
MMI, i.e., having reached maximum medical improvement. That date may be a moving target since it is unknown
how long a given COVID-19 patient will have active symptoms. As a general application, persons who present with
a work related COVID-19 infection with mild symptoms can return to work 10 days after their fever is below 100.4
degrees F and symptoms have ended.
A. Pulmonary Function
The first consideration for a WPI rating would include Table 5-12 on page 107 of the AMA Guides, 5th Edition. This
table shows the overall WPI ratings for the four classes of pulmonary function and exercise test results. These
ratings are based on pulmonary function testing, which includes forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV-1),
forced vital capacity (FVC), the FEV-1/FVC ratio, Dco (diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide), Vo2 max (maximum
oxygen consumption), and METS (metabolic equivalent tasks). These parameters are discussed within this section
of this guidebook above for asthma and pulmonary fibrosis cases.
What is significant in the context of COVID-19 WPI ratings on a strict basis, is the METS or metabolic equivalent of
tasks, which is reflected in both Table 5-8 on page 101 of the AMA Guides and Table 5-12 on page 107. A METS of
1.0 reflects how much energy is expended while a person is at rest doing nothing. So, a METS of 1.0 reflects the
energy expended for autonomic activities—breathing, brain work, and basic movements we do while at rest. A man
who weighs 154 lbs., with a METS of 1.0, expends 1.2 Kcal/minute of energy. He would expend 3 METS when
walking about 2.7 miles per hour. A person who can exert 5.0 METS can perform an 18-hole round of golf or can
walk 3-4 miles per hour for 20 minutes. A person with a METS of 7.0 can run 4-5 miles per hour for 20 minutes. A
person who can achieve a METS of 10 or greater on a treadmill test is in excellent physical condition.
Table 5-8 has exertional values for the arduousness of work. So, light work would require sustained ability to
perform at a METS of 2.0. Moderate work would require 2 to 4 METS. Heavy work would require 5-6 METS, very
Page 11 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
heavy work requires 7-8 METS, and arduous work would require greater than 8 METS. Under Table 5-12, a person
with a residual METS of less than 4.3 and FVC of less than or equal to 50% would have between a 51% and 100%
WPI rating. Similarly, a physician could utilize Table 3-6a based on residual METS due to the overall long-term
effects of a COVID-19 disease process on residual exertional capacities.
B. Circulatory System and Heart Function
Many COVID-19 patients suffer from heart failure as a result of the attack of the virus on the lungs. This is because
the exchange of oxygen from the lungs to the cardiovascular system can be severely compromised. Any residual
cardiac impairment would be rated under Chapter 3 of the AMA Guides to include any permanent limitations in
cardiac output or other functions including coronary heart disease (Table 3-6a on page 36), pericardial heart
disease (Table 3-10 on page 52), and arrhythmias (Table 3-11, page 56).
In addition, WPI ratings could include consideration of other body systems permanently affected by a COVID-19
infection. A person who has to take blood thinners due to blood clots as a consequence of the disease could get
assigned a WPI rating of up to 10% in the text on page 203 of the AMA Guides, along with Tables, 9-2, 9-3, and 9-4
for any residual blood disorders.
C. Liver Function
Permanent impairment of liver function due to COVD-19 infection is found on page 133 at Tables 6-7 and 6-8. All of
these impairments are driven by objective liver function studies.
D. Miscellaneous Body Parts and Systems
There are cases involving COVID-19 infection where the blood clots are so severe that the patient has to suffer
from an amputation of a leg. This results in a WPI rating of 28% for a below knee amputation and a 40% WPI rating
for above the knee amputation under Table 17-32 on page 545. Similarly, many COVID-19 patients have a stroke,
despite having no prior known risk factor for having a stroke. Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides would apply for WPI
ratings due to a stroke for hemi-paraplegia, cognitive disorders, upper and lower extremity impairments, and overall
brain function. See Tables 13-4, 13-2, 13-3, 13-4, 13-5, 13-6, 13-15, 13-16, and 13-17.
There is an additional issue of when an employee is required to either obtain a vaccination against COVID-19 or to
be tested every week for it. What happens if an employee who chooses to get the vaccine has severe side effects
from the vaccine? We know that side effects can vary from none to minor myofascial pain in the arm where the shot
is administered to full-blown anaphylactic shock. Claims administrators must be informed by counsel that side
effects from an employer-mandated vaccination are compensable.
V. Conclusion
The residual disability for injured workers who contract the COVID-19 at work may be from 0% WPI to 100%
permanent total disability, which means that each case has to be evaluated separately.
This discussion of COVID-19 is based on limited data that has emerged worldwide from the pandemic that began in
December 2019. As time progresses, the data bank for COVID-19 will develop, and the discussion about causation
of injury, causation of disability, prognoses, and the overall epidemiology of the disease will evolve. The discussion
about industrial causation or work-relatedness of a COVID-19 infection is also in very early stages. The consensus
of medical experts early in the pandemic is that control of the spread of the virus will depend on the earliest of herd
immunity or the development of an effective vaccine. Remember, no vaccine has been developed for the HIV virus
that causes AIDS and it has been since 1981 since AIDS was discovered. However, people who test positive for
HIV infection can live long, productive lives due to the regimen of three or four antiretroviral drugs, collectively
known as highly active antiretroviral therapy, or HAART.
It appears likely that COVID-19 infections will continue to occur worldwide and herd immunity is far from likely to
happen. The infection rates have varied during the course of the year and during specific seasons. The vaccines
and antiviral medications such as Paxlovid have significantly reduced both the hospitalization and mortality rates of
Page 12 of 12
§ 3.05 AMA Guides Chapter 5: The Respiratory System
people who get infected. Rating COVID-19 infection when it reaches maximum medical improvement may pose a
problem since in many cases upper and lower respiratory system damage may occur along with other systems
such as the brain and psyche considerations.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.06
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.06 AMA Guides Chapter 6: The Digestive System

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 6.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 6: THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
• DUODENAL/PEPTIC ULCERS
• ESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE (GERD)
• HIATAL HERNIAS
• ABDOMINAL HERNIAS
• INGUINAL HERNIAS
• ULCERATIVE COLITIS
• HEPATITIS
• CROHN’S DISEASE
• IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME
• COLO-RECTAL CANCER
• ABNORMAL LIVER FUNCTION (SIDE EFFECTS OF MEDICATIONS)
AMA Guides Chapter 6 covers the digestive system. Most of the listed impairments would not apply in a workers’
compensation claim. Tables 6-1 and 6-2 on page 120 of the AMA Guides list “desirable” body weights by height and
body build for men and women, respectively, since most of the impairments cause an adverse effect on a person’s
weight. The problem with these tables is that they are based on obsolete data—1999 Metropolitan Life Insurance
Company information—and not currently updated from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or from any
other reliable actuarial source. Table 6-3 on page 121 lists whole person impairments based upon the upper gastro-
intestinal tract (the esophagus, stomach, duodenum, small intestine, and pancreas). You would evaluate and rate
gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD), hiatal hernia, ulcers, and diabetes in this AMA Guides chapter (for
diabetes, see also AMA Guides Chapter 10 (endocrine system). Permanent impairments are partly indexed to
weight loss due to the digestive disorder, which rarely if ever occurs in workers’ compensation cases.
The term “dysphagia” in example 6-10 on page 125 means trouble swallowing. In many cases in which an anterior
cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) is performed orthopedically, a common risk factor from the surgery is
dysphagia, which is ratable under Chapter 6, Table 6-3 on page 121. There are cases where the injured worker has
an ACDF procedure and has difficulty swallowing after the surgery. Most of the time and in most patients, these
symptoms will resolve within a few weeks from the surgery. Other times, difficulty swallowing becomes a permanent
Page 2 of 4
§ 3.06 AMA Guides Chapter 6: The Digestive System
condition and is ratable in this chapter. This is caused by one of three ways, either by damage from intubation, or by
moving the esophagus to the side during the anterior surgical approach, or from scar tissue that forms around the
plates and screws implanted hardware for the spinal repair.
Table 6-4 on page 128 covers disorders of the lower digestive system (the colon, rectum, and anus). Ulcerative
colitis and Crohn’s disease are included as examples for this table, which also includes different classes of
impairments, depending upon the severity of the condition. This could include irritable bowel syndrome, medication
side effects, and fecal/bowel incontinence (neurogenic or Crohn’s Disease). See Table 6-5, page 131, for whole
person impairment due to anal disorders, such as abscesses and fistulas. Table 6-7 and Table 6-8, page 133, cover
impairments dues to liver and biliary tract diseases, including hepatitis, cirrhosis, and alcoholism. Remember,
“hepatic” means liver and “renal” means kidneys. For liver disorders, blood and urine tests are essential for any
diagnosis. In example 6-27 on page 135, the authors consider a person on a liver transplant list as having a 50–
95% WPI when at the time of diagnosis of biliary cirrhosis, the patient had a 40% WPI.
A recent example of the use of Table 6-4 is for a police officer who developed colon cancer. The officer is entitled to
the cancer presumption under Labor Code § 3212.1. An AME in internal medicine opined that the Applicant was a
Class 2, 19% WPI based on the alteration of his colon due to resection of the tumor and due to the fact that two
lymph nodes were also cancerous (ratable simply under the terms in Table 6-4 Class 2: “Objective evidence of
colonic or rectal disease or anatomic loss or alteration”). Counsel should also be aware that chemotherapy and
radiation therapy can also cause permanent impairment that is separate and apart from the impairment directly
attributed to the cancer itself. A common side effect from standard chemotherapy is permanent peripheral
neuropathies of the hands and feet (especially sensations of burning or numbness), and liver chemistry changes, all
of which have separate WPI ratings (See Table 6-7 for the liver abnormalities and see AMA Guides Chapters 16
and 17 for the peripheral neuropathies for the upper and lower extremities).
Table 6-9 on page 136 covers all hernias (inguinal, hiatal, and abdominal). Note that a “no heavy lifting” restriction
is a 10% whole person impairment if there is “frequent discomfort, precluding heavy lifting, but not hampering some
activities of daily living.” This is one of the few places in the AMA Guides where an impairment rating is linked to a
work restriction. There is a lot of wiggle room within Class 1, Class 2, and Class 3 impairments due to hernias. One
major controversy has occurred in the interpretation of Table 6-9 is what constitutes a “palpable defect in supporting
structures of abdominal wall” which is required in all three classes of hernia impairments. One of the senior editors
of the 5th edition of the AMA Guides informed us that a “palpable defect” can be detected in every hernia case
where there has been a surgical mesh repair of the hernia and the physician can feel the scar tissue and mesh
through the incision site by a physical examination and palpation of the area.
The second criteria in a Class 1 (“Slight protrusion at site of defect with increased abdominal pressure, readily
reducible.”) is required if there is no surgical repair or an unsuccessful repair of the hernia. Contrary to dealing with
hernia cases under the 1997 PDRS, most hernia cases are now ratable under a Class 1, even with a successful
surgical repair, which rating is between 0% and 9% WPI, depending upon whether there is “occasional mild
discomfort at the site of defect but not precluding most activities of daily living.” The treating or evaluating physician
has significant discretion to assign anywhere from a 0% WPI rating to a 9% WPI rating under Class 1, based solely
on the subjective complaints of the patient after a successful hernia repair. This is one of those rare occasions
where an impairment rating under the AMA Guides is higher than a permanent disability rating under the 1997
PDRS for the same medical condition.
Notice that all types of hernias are covered in Chapter 6, The Digestive System, and not in Chapter 7, The Urinary
and Reproductive System. This is one of those strange ways the AMA Guides is organized by the editors.
Table 6-9 is known more for its use in orthopedic cases than it is for hernia cases. Many physicians are using a
Class 2 impairment rating under Table 6-9 for lumbar spinal cases where the descriptions and measurements under
Chapter 15 of the AMA Guides do not provide an accurate WPI rating. Under the case of Milpitas Unified School
District v. Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board (Guzman III) [(2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases
837], discussed in detail in chapter 7 of this guidebook, this method of evaluating a spinal impairment outside the
spinal impairment chapter of the AMA Guides may no longer be appropriate. However, there is no specific case law
Page 3 of 4
§ 3.06 AMA Guides Chapter 6: The Digestive System
on the subject, and many judges are still allowing this method of rating. However, any physician who uses Table 6-9
to rate lumbar spinal impairment must state with particularity his or her rationale for using this method and why it is
the most accurate and reliable method over any standard DRE or ROM method described in Chapter 15 of the AMA
Guides.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Using Table 6-9 to rate a lumbar spinal injury is fraught with difficulty. Table 6-9 is the only table in the AMA
Guides that has a work restriction (“no heavy lifting”) associated with a WPI rating. There are so many better
alternative rating methods in Chapter 15 of the AMA Guides that can be utilized as an alternative rating that
would be more accurate than a strict WPI rating from the same chapter or by using Table 6-9 in the hernia
chapter. In Guzman III, the court cautioned us not to use a rating in order to obtain a more desirable result,
but to use the Guides to obtain the most accurate rating in a given case. This created a comfort zone for
physicians to utilize the hernia table in lumbar spine cases even though we are told that impairment ratings
cannot be based on work restrictions. So counsel must approach the use of Table 6-9 in lumbar spinal
cases with suspicion. Hint: Using Table 15-7 as a stand-alone alternative rating method is a more honest
and effective way to use the Guzman III case to rebut a strict DRE lumbar, cervical, or thoracic spine WPI
rating than using the hernia table.
Table 6-10 on page 138 is a summary of digestive disorders and the reference tables to determine degrees of
impairment. Note in Table 6-10 on page 138 that stomach diseases include the typical symptoms caused by the
side effects of NSAIDs.
Table 6-10 also includes a reference under stomach diseases to diabetes with neuropathy with a cross-reference to
Table 6-3 on page 121. There is tremendous variance within each of the four classes of whole person impairments
in Table 6-3. With diabetes, you should refer to Table 6-3 along with those in AMA Guides Chapters 3, 4, 10, 12,
13, and 17 for heart, endocrine, vision, neurological, and lower extremity impairments if there are functional or
anatomic deficits due to diabetes. You are better off starting with Chapter 10 of the AMA Guides to obtain the basic
WPI rating for diabetes and then work your way through other tables, chapters and methods to capture all ratable
impairments that exist as a result of the diabetes. See § 3.10 of this guidebook for a detailed discussion of diabetes.
Also note the issue of causation and apportionment to causation since many of these disorders have multiple
causes and some that are unknown. Most gastro-intestinal disorders have multiple and concurrent causes with
emotional stress being one of them. However, again, the authors of the AMA Guides do not discuss causation or
apportionment within these chapters.
We frequently see cases that involve gastro-esophageal reflux disease, or GERD which is usually pled as a
compensable consequence of long term use of NSAID medications for an industrially related orthopedic injury.
GERD is ratable for permanent impairment using Table 6-3 ratings for impairment to the upper digestive tract. In
fact, on page 123, Example 6-6 provides a 15% WPI rating for what we could call a typical GERD case. This is a
great illustration of why counsel should always review the examples of cases in the AMA Guides.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Counsel should always read the examples of cases that the authors of the AMA Guides provide at the end
of sections and chapters. This is illustrative of how you can use an example in the Guides in a case involving
esophageal reflux disease that is caused by chronic use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS).
Most physicians do not read the examples in the book, and Example 6-6 on page 123 should be handed to a
physician during a deposition by an applicant’s attorney and the physician asked a question about how close
Example 6-6 is to the case being discussed in the deposition. For the defense side, remember that the
Guides were published in 2000 and much newer anti-reflux medications have been developed since.
Page 4 of 4
§ 3.06 AMA Guides Chapter 6: The Digestive System
The FEC adjustment for impairments to the digestive system takes a ranking of [6] for all impairments within this
chapter of the AMA Guides. See the 2005 PDRS, page 2-2. Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of body
for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.07
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.07 AMA Guides Chapter 7: The Urinary and Reproductive System

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 7.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 7: THE URINARY AND REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS
• SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION
• NEUROGENIC BLADDAR (FAILED LUMBAR SURGERY)
• KIDNEY DISEASE (INCLUDING SIDE EFFECTS OF MEDICATION)
AMA Guides Chapter 7 covers the urinary and reproductive systems. Table 7-1 on page 146 covers whole person
impairments for upper urinary tract (kidney or renal) disorders. These are usually kidney stones, cancer, and other
disorders that are rarely work related. In fact, if a person has only one functioning kidney, he or she automatically
has a 10% whole person impairment. Kidney disorders can also be caused by the consequences of chronic
medication use and other disorders such as diabetes or severe hypertension. If you have a case involving kidney or
renal function impairment that is caused in part by medication use or another disorder such as diabetes or
hypertension, a separate rating for the renal function impairment in this chapter is appropriate and combined with
the underlying primary impairment rating.
Bladder disorders, which are covered in Table 7-3 on page 151, include urinary incontinence or abnormal urinary
frequency (urinating more than once every two hours or more than three times at night with constant treatment).
Note again the variance within the three classes of permanent  impairments that add up to 70% whole person
impairment for the most severe disorders. These WPI ratings are based on diagnosis, urine analysis, urodynamic
testing, and other diagnostic studies performed at the request of a urologist.
Remember, if you have a workers’ compensation client who has no bladder control due to failed back surgery
(neurogenic incontinence), once the 41–71% WPI is adjusted for age, occupation, and loss of future earning
capacity, then he or she is probably close to 100% permanent disability. Use AMA Guides Chapters 13, and 15,
Table 13-19 on page 341 and its identical twin Table 15-6(d) on page 397, respectively, for those types of cases.
Use the Combined Values Chart on page 604 to combine WPI for bladder or bowel impairments and the spinal
impairment that led to the bladder or bowel dysfunction.
If you have a case that involves stress incontinence as well as sexual dysfunction due to neurogenic problems,
such as failed lumbar surgery, strokes, or serious spinal cord injuries, the impairment ratings for the sexual
dysfunction and stress incontinence are combined even though the impairments come from the same chapter of the
AMA Guides and are further combined with any other impairment that is evaluated under any other chapter of the
AMA Guides, such as spinal disorders in Chapter 15 of the Guides or central nervous system disorders in Chapter
13 of the Guides. Be sure to understand that in any spinal injury case, there is a stand-alone WPI rating for the
Page 2 of 2
§ 3.07 AMA Guides Chapter 7: The Urinary and Reproductive System
spinal disorder itself, through the DRE, ROM, or other spinal-specific method of rating and a separate rating for any
spinal cord injury under the Corticospinal Tract impairment ratings, which are listed on pages 396 and 397 of the
AMA Guides and which are identical to the tables on pages 341 and 342 in Chapter 13 that pertain to the same loss
of function from a neurological standpoint.
We do know that for dates of injury on or after January 1, 2013, no permanent disability can be awarded for sexual
dysfunction that is a result of a physical injury, pursuant to Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(1).  However, counsel for injured
workers may have a viable argument under the Hikida case [see Hikida v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2017) 12
Cal. App. 5th 1249, 82 Cal. Comp. Cases 679] that sexual dysfunction caused by subsequent medical treatment,
such as complications from a spinal fusion, or from prostate cancer under a safety member presumption, could
result in WPI ratings that would be included due to the resulting sexual dysfunction.
Also, remember that in applying Chapter 7 of the AMA Guides to your cases, any claim of impairment due to sexual
dysfunction or urinary incontinence must be supported by a pathophysiological explanation and cannot be solely
based upon psychiatric reasons. You also have to remember that for post 1/1/13 dates of injury, if sexual
dysfunction (and, in addition, sleep disorders and psyche) are compensable consequences of a physical injury then
no permanent disability can be awarded pursuant to Labor Code § 4660.1(b)(2). However, a recent case
distinguishes sexual dysfunction that is directly caused by an industrial injury and that which is a consequence of a
physical injury. In City of Los Angeles v. WCAB (Montenegro) [(2016) 81 Cal. Comp. Cases 611 (writ denied)], the
WCAB found that a firefighter who developed prostate cancer was allowed to be awarded a 20% WPI for sexual
dysfunction due to the fact that he sustained direct trauma to his reproductive system from the prostectomy surgical
procedure that damaged the seminal vesicle and nerves.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many applicant attorneys routinely claim “sexual dysfunction” as an allegation of an injured “body part” in
claim forms and Applications for Adjudication of Claim. In most cases, this is just an “attorney generated part
of body claimed” and has nothing to do with the actual loss of function, a body part, or body system—it is
merely an attempt to “bump-up” a WPI rating when the applicant is MMI. We frequently see chiropractors
giving ratings under Chapter 7, even though this entire subject is beyond the scope of a chiropractor’s
license. If an injured worker truly has sexual dysfunction from an industrial injury, best practices dictate that
it be diagnosed, evaluated, and rated on a patho-physiological basis by a urologist, rather than just existing
as an attorney-created add-on.
Urinary and reproductive disorders and their reference tables are summarized in Table 7-12 on page 170. You
should follow the urinary or reproductive system disorder in Table 7-12 to the proper tables listed on page 171 of
the AMA Guides. The medical examples in AMA Guides Chapter 7 do not help us much in work related cases,
though, because they are not typical of medical conditions we see in workers’ compensation cases.
The FEC adjustment for any disorder involving the urinary or reproductive system is a ranking of [2]. See the 2005
PDRS, page 2-2. Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is
a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.08
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.08 AMA Guides Chapter 8: The Skin

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 8.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 8: THE SKIN
• DERMATITIS
• UTICARIA (HIVES)
• LATEX ALLERGIES
• CHEMICAL EXPOSURES
• BURNS
• SCARRING/DISFIGUREMENTS
• CANCER
AMA Guides Chapter 8 involves skin disorders. This chapter includes discussion and evaluation of contact
dermatitis, latex allergies, burns (chemical and fire), scarring, and cancer. In burn cases, combine impairments
under AMA Guides Chapter 8 (skin), Chapter 5 (respiratory), Chapters 15, 16, or 17 (musculoskeletal), and
Chapters 14 and 18 (psyche and pain) using the Combined Values Chart on page 604.
Table 8-1 on page 174 covers the various levels and disorders of the skin. Most disfigurement cases do not involve
loss of functioning in ADLs except social withdrawal that is covered under the mental and behavioral disorders
(AMA Guides Chapter 14). Latex allergies are referred to AMA Guides Chapter 5 (Respiratory System) for WPI.
Table 8-2 on page 178 covers whole person impairments for skin related disorders that cause impairments in ADLs.
The instructions for use of Table 8-2 on page 174 state for the evaluating physician of skin disorders to: “Determine
the appropriate percentage within any impairment class by considering the frequency, intensity and complexity of
the medical condition and the treatment regimen. In general, the more frequent and intense the symptoms, signs
and medical treatment, the higher the estimated impairment rating within any impairment class.”
Then the instructions go on to say that if the skin condition causes other impairments in other body systems, those
impairments should be separately rated and then combined using the combined values chart. In fact, in many burn
cases, there are ratable WPI impairments under Table 8-2 and an additional rating for loss of motion or strength
due to loss of tissue flexibility or muscle loss from the burn injury.
COMMON MISTAKES:
Page 2 of 4
§ 3.08 AMA Guides Chapter 8: The Skin
In any burn case, you must make sure the treating and evaluating physicians describe not only the actual
percentage of body area burned and the degree of burn, but also the percentage of body area that was used
as skin grafts. When plastic surgeons and burn specialists harvest skin for grafting, the grafting area
changes forever—sweat glands do not function well and the new skin is not as “functional” as the original
skin, especially with hot and cold sensations, itching, dryness and tactile response. In doing an impairment
rating, the evaluating or treating physician must give a total percentage of a person’s body that was burned
together with the total percentage of the body that was used for skin grafts. Table 8-2 allows physicians to
take into account the burn and graft areas together to formulate a WPI rating.
The authors of Chapter 8 define the word disfigurement as an “altered or abnormal appearance that may be an
alteration of color, shape or structure, of a combination of these.” On page 176 there is a very good description of
how to rate scar tissue and skin grafts. As stated in § 3.11 of this guidebook, when you have any case involving
disfigurement, scarring or skin grafts, you should always have color photographs of the affected areas so that a
DEU rater can view the disfigurement and provide the appropriate WPI rating from Chapter 8.
There are some good occupational exposure examples that result in WPI due to chemical exposures and burns.
Table 8-3 on page 188 is a summary and reference guide to skin disorders. When you have a skin related injury,
always start with Table 8-3 to see where any impairment may be included in this chapter.
A recent case demonstrates how a dermatologist QME failed to properly evaluate a work related burn case. The
following case involved a 0% Stipulations With Request for Award proposed settlement that was rejected by a
judge. A 69-year-old bookkeeper while at work on 10/08/2018 knocked over a thermos of hot water onto her lap at
her desk, burning her left thigh and less so on her right thigh. She did not report the injury but went home and put
herbal oil on her thighs. The next day she went to the emergency room where they gave her a tetanus shot,
cleaned the wounds and noticed her blood pressure was very high. She went to her primary care physician who told
her to file a workers’ compensation claim, which she did, and was referred to an MPN primary treating physician in
occupational medicine. She was told to clean the wounds daily, which she did, but she became frustrated and went
to a private dermatologist after two months. The wounds were blistering and sore, with thick scarring. The
dermatologist gave her laser treatments to the burned scars on the left anterior and proximal thigh scars. She
missed three days from work but actively treated for one year and was declared MMI in September 2019.
A PQME dermatology exam occurred on 1/15/2020 wherein the doctor opined:
[She] complains of itching, violaceous coloring and hyperpigmentation in the burn area on her left lateral thigh
that measures 20 cm from medial to lateral from the left medial thigh to the left lateral thigh and 30 cm from
medial to distal from the left thigh inguinal crease down to around the distal mid-thigh. The redness of the burn
scar is redder now than it has been in the past month. The present appearance of the scar including the
itchiness has been that way for the past six months.
PQME exam report goes on to say:
The patient suffered from a second degree burn on her left anterior thigh. Medically probable it became
infected through her use of putting herbal medicine on the burn. She has a pigmented flat scar on her left thigh
that is quite violaceous proximally in a band that is 7 cm from medial lateral x 4 cm proximal distal [Author’s
note: This is a little more than 4 square inches]. She has a patch approximately 30 cm from proximal to distal
by 20 cm medial and lateral with the periphery of that patch is hyper-pigmented and violaceous. The claimant
does not seem to care about the cosmetic appearance of the scar.
The PQME listed the above findings as Applicant’s permanent objective findings and then stated: “According to the
fifth edition of the AMA Guides on page 178, Table 8.2 she is in a category 1 with 0% impairment.” “Apportionment:
is not indicated since there is no disability to apportion.”
Page 3 of 4
§ 3.08 AMA Guides Chapter 8: The Skin
His future medical treatment discussion took half a page of single-spaced recommendations, which included
“Pramosone lotion, hydroquinone, plus Retin-A plus hydrocortisone bleaching cream to be administered daily.” He
did not include any color photographs of her left or right thigh. He did not even mention her right thigh at all.
The judge was particularly offended by the QME’s rather insensitive statement that the claimant does not seem to
care about the cosmetic appearance of the scar. This statement clearly involved an overt form of cultural bias since
the claimant is an elderly Asian woman who may not express concern about the appearance of a 16 square inch
burn scar on her thigh. This is why the rating system in Table 8-2 does account for cosmetic disfigurement,
regardless of how a patient subjectively reacts to the existence of one. This QME failed to correctly apply the
standards set forth in the text and tables of Chapter 8 of the AMA Guides.
This case represents a total misapplication of Table 8-2.
A Class 1 impairment rating from Table 8-2 is a 0% to 9% WPI rating and requires: Skin disorder signs and
symptoms present or intermittently present and no or few limitations in performance of ADLs, exposure to certain
chemical or physical agents may temporarily increase limitation and requires no or intermittent treatment.
A Class 2 impairment rating from Table 8-2 is a 10% to 24% WPI rating and requires: Skin disorder signs and
symptoms present or intermittently present and limited performance of some ADLs and may require intermittent to
constant treatment.
The footnote below Table 8-2 states: “The signs and symptoms of disorders in classes 1, 2, and 3 may be
intermittent and not present at the time of examination. Consider the impact of skin disorder on the ability to perform
activities of daily living (see Table 1-2) in determining the class of impairment. Consider the frequency and intensity
of signs and symptoms (i.e. severity) and the frequency and complexity of medical treatment when selecting the
appropriate impairment percentage and estimate within any class (see Introduction).”
Pertinent to this discussion, the Introduction to Chapter 8 of the AMA Guides states: “Permanent impairment of the
skin is any dermatologic abnormality or loss that persists after medical treatment and rehabilitation and that is
unlikely to change significantly in the next year with or without medical treatment.” On page 174 of the AMA Guides
the authors state in part: “Determine the appropriate percentage within any impairment class by considering the
frequency, intensity, and complexity of the medical condition and the treatment regimen. In general, the more
frequent and intense the symptoms, signs and medical treatment, the higher the estimated impairment rating within
any impairment class.”
Since the physician failed to include photographs of the left and right thigh, there is no way for anyone to evaluate
the residual cosmetic deformity or deformities caused by the burn injury. However, just based on the criteria set
forth on page 174, this patient should have been rated on the high end of Class 1 or low end of Class 2. In fact, on
page 176, the authors state concerning cosmetic deformities: “Enhance disfigurement descriptions with good color
photographs that show multiple defect views. Estimate the probable duration and permanency of the disfigurement
… good color photographs with multiple views of the defect enhance the scars’ description.”
This case involves a 4" x 4" scarring on the Applicant’s left thigh that requires daily treatment with ointments with
some minor symptoms. A Class 2 impairment rating is one that includes “intermittent to constant treatment” which is
probably consistent with this case. A PQME in dermatology found that the Applicant has a 12% WPI based on the
daily treatment regimen and residual scarring on the left thigh and the fact that the right thigh also showed a minor
2" x 2" scar.
The FEC adjustment for any skin related disorders such as disfigurement, scars and skin grafts, contact dermatitis,
latex allergy, and skin cancer is a ranking of [2]. See the 2005 PDRS, page 2-2. Remember, the adjustment factor
for all parts of body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI
rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 4 of 4
§ 3.08 AMA Guides Chapter 8: The Skin
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.09
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.09 AMA Guides Chapter 9: The Hematopoietic System

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 9.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 9: THE HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
• ANEMIA
• LEUKEMIA
• THROMBOCYTOPENIA (CHEMICAL OR MEDICATION RELATED)
• HIV/AIDS INFECTION
• HODGKIN’S DISEASE
• WHITE BLOOD CELL DISORDERS
AMA Guides Chapter 9 covers the hematopoietic system, which refers to the system that makes blood cells work,
including the bone marrow, lymph nodes, and spleen and the functioning of the cells in terms of clotting, anemia,
and other disorders of the blood system.
This AMA Guides chapter is important for any condition that involves anemia, clotting problems, diminished platelet
or white cell counts, or bleeding disorders. There is suspicion that many common medications may cause some
blood disorders, such as thrombocytopenia (low platelet count) or anemia.
Table 9-2 on page 193 covers four classes of impairments due to anemia (class 2 is 11–30% WPI for anemia
without symptoms, hemoglobin 8-10 grams per deciliter of blood and no transfusion required). Remember, anemia
affects the ability of the heart to send oxygen to the body’s other organs and even if there are no symptoms, the
consequences of anemia can be severe. Symptoms include shortness of breath on exertion, dizziness, headaches,
and fatigue. Anemia can occur due to a stroke (head injury), blood loss, side effects of some medications, and
chemotherapy or, in rare cases, to chemical exposure.
Platelet and bleeding disorders are covered by Table 9-4 on page 203. Most of these disorders do not result in
permanent impairment unless there is serious bleeding or the condition is refractory to treatment. The impairments
depend upon the effect of a disorder and its treatment requirements on ADLs.
In many coronary heart disease and deep vein thrombosis cases, a treating physician will prescribe Coumadin®
(warfarin) or Plavix®, or some of the newer generation drugs as a blood thinner to protect against a future heart
attack or other embolism from a dislodged plaque within an artery or vein. As discussed in Ch. 3, § 3.03 of this
guidebook, certain medications can cause their own side effects that are separately ratable from the underlying
medical condition. Coumadin and Plavix are such medications. The authors of the AMA Guides on page 203
Page 2 of 2
§ 3.09 AMA Guides Chapter 9: The Hematopoietic System
indicate that anyone who is taking an anticoagulant (such as warfarin) should avoid activities that might lead to
trauma. They go on to say: “Impairment of the whole person with acquired blood clotting defects is estimated at 0%
to 10% WPI.” This assessment is consistent with the criteria in Table 9-4 on page 203 for impairments due to
hemorrhagic and platelet disorders, even if that disorder is caused by a prescribed medication. This is one of the
few places in the AMA Guides where ratable impairment criteria is listed within the text of the book rather than from
a table or figure.
The summary of blood related disorders is set forth in Table 9-5 on page 208.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Counsel should always know what medications are prescribed at the time an applicant is declared MMI.
Long term use of aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen, and combination narcotics all contain NSAIDs and have
blood thinning side effects. These can result in 0% to 10% WPI impairment ratings and are commonly
missed by evaluating and treating physicians when a final MMI report is issued.
Note that this chapter of the AMA Guides also covers lymphomas, Hodgkin’s disease, leukemias (chronic
lymphatic, chronic myelogenous, acute lymphatic, and hairy cell), HIV, and AIDS. If a patient has active AIDS, each
affected body organ or system must be rated separately for impairment, and those impairments are then combined.
The FEC adjustment for any impairment that is found in this chapter takes a ranking of [2]. See the 2005 PDRS,
page 2-2. However, if any workers’ compensation case involves the hematological system, you must be on the alert
for impairments that occur that are ratable in other chapters of the AMA Guides. Remember, the adjustment factor
for all parts of body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI
rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.10
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.10 AMA Guides Chapter 10: The Endocrine System

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 10.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 10: THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
• DIABETES
• THYROID CONDITIONS
• PARATHYROID CONDITIONS
• ADRENAL CONDITIONS
• OSTEOPOROSIS
• CUSHING’S DISEASE
• ADDISON’S DISEASE
• HYPOGLYCEMIA
AMA Guides Chapter 10 covers disorders that involve the endocrine system, i.e., things that make hormones. This
would include functioning of the thyroid, pancreas, and adrenals. This chapter is relevant for diabetes (pancreas)
and head injuries if the hypothalamus or pituitary glands are affected. Also relevant are any disorders caused by
steroid use.
Table 10-8 on page 231 covers four classes of permanent whole person impairment due to diabetes (up to 40%
WPI). Type 2 diabetes appears to be only ratable up to Class 2 (6% to 10% WPI). Remember, though, diabetes
affects other body systems including vision—diabetic retinopathy (AMA Guides Chapter 12), kidneys (AMA Guides
Chapter 7), diabetic polyneuropathy (AMA Guides Chapter 13), and the cardio-vascular system (AMA Guides
Chapters 3 and 4). Table 10-9 on page 235 includes impairments for hypoglycemia. See the detailed description of
Types 1 and 2 diabetes below.
Table 10-10 on page 242 has a summary of endocrine system disorders and the reference to the proper tables.
See Example 3, in this guidebook at Ch. 5, § 5.03, of an injured worker whose diabetes is aggravated by industrial
exposure. The only medical condition in this chapter of the AMA Guides that we will see in our cases is diabetes. In
fact, the 2005 PDRS only lists diabetes as a ratable permanent impairment category for this chapter. However, it
should be noted that if a medical condition involving the endocrine system is directly or indirectly caused by an
industrial injury, this chapter may have other impairment ratings that can be determined under the same rating
criteria as diabetes in terms of the FEC adjustment.
Page 2 of 4
§ 3.10 AMA Guides Chapter 10: The Endocrine System
The epidemiology of diabetes mellitus has changed since the 1980’s and 1990’s, and a discussion about recent
developments in the diagnosis, treatment and a medical-legal analysis of diabetes mellitus is appropriate here.
Some common misconceptions about diabetes mellitus have emerged within the context of workers’ compensation
cases in California over the years, including the question of whether emotional stress can cause, aggravate and/or
accelerate the symptoms of diabetes mellitus. The resolution of controversies like this one from a medical-legal
standpoint requires a more in-depth analysis of the disease and its sequelae.
The disease process of diabetes mellitus refers to a disorder of one’s ability to metabolize carbohydrates, or sugars.
The result is that a person with diabetes develops hyperglycemia, too much sugar in the blood, which over time will
destroy cells and cellular function. The most accurate and standard of care testing is the “fasting plasma glucose”
test. Normal fasting (6–12 hours) plasma glucose is glucose of less than 100 mg/deciliter of blood. A person with
fasting plasma glucose of between 100–125 mg/dL has “impaired glucose regulation” or is a borderline Type 2
diabetic. A person with fasting plasma glucose of at or over 126 mg/dL is diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. The
hemoglobin HbA1c blood test is a fairly new diabetes test that is now being used to determine how well a person’s
blood sugar has been under control, if at all, over the 90-day period prior to the date of the test. Generally, this
glycemic index test evaluates how much sugar is attached to red blood cells. Originally, a reading of <7% was
considered normal but the current desired reading is <6%. So now, endocrinologists have two significant tests in
their arsenal—the standard fasting blood sugar testing and the A1c 90-day testing.
The effect of both types of diabetes mellitus on a person can be devastating as you know. The long-term effects of
diabetes will affect both the microvascular and macrovascular systems (vascular damage), causing potential
diabetic retinopathy in the eyes, renal failure, hypertension and peripheral neuropathies.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus used to be called “juvenile onset” diabetes, but that term is now obsolete because of the
overlap between age group onset and treatment between Type 1 and Type 2 patients. Both types of diabetes can
occur at any age, but Type 1 usually occurs when a person is under 30 years of age while Type 2 generally occurs
when a person is over 30 years of age. Obesity is associated with Type 2, but not with Type 1 diabetes.
People with Type 1 diabetes mellitus are insulin dependent because they do not produce any insulin since the cells
that produce it (pancreatic autoimmune beta-cells) are destroyed over time. There is growing evidence that
pancreatic beta-cell destruction is triggered by environmental factors in people who are genetically susceptible.
However, there is no direct genetic link to people with Type 1 diabetes, and it would be a mistake for any physician
to tell you that a person’s diabetes is caused by their genetic make-up. Less than 10% of people with diabetes have
Type 1. In fact, some viruses have been linked to the onset of Type 1 diabetes, including rubella, cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-Barr and retroviruses. So, you see, this stuff is not as simple as you thought.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus used to be called “adult onset diabetes,” but due to recent epidemiology studies, that term
is also obsolete. A person with Type 2 diabetes mellitus has inadequate insulin secretion. At first, insulin production
is normal, but the liver releases sugar into the blood to a point where insulin resistance develops and a lower
production of insulin in the pancreas gradually occurs. Type 2 generally develops in adulthood and becomes more
common with age. Plasma glucose levels reach higher levels after an older adult eats than after a younger adult
eats, especially after a meal that is high in carbohydrates. Blood plasma glucose levels take longer to normalize in
people who have lots of abdominal and visceral fat.
Over 90% of adults with diabetes mellitus have Type 2 and, alarmingly, between 40–50% of children who develop
new-onset diabetes mellitus have Type 2. There are genetic determinants within ethnic groups such as American
Indians, Hispanics and Asians. However, no genes responsible for the most common forms of diabetes mellitus
Type 2 have been identified.
It is well accepted within the medical community that obesity and weight gain increases the risk of insulin
resistance, which in turn can cause Type 2 diabetes in children and adults. The development of insulin resistance
can also be affected by some genetic determinants, but diet, exercise and lifestyle all play more important roles in
the body’s regulation of insulin. Risk factors for Type 2 diabetes mellitus include people older than 45 years,
obesity, sedentary lifestyle, family history of diabetes, history of impaired glucose regulation, history of
hypertension, black, Hispanic or American Indian ethnicity, anyone who is overweight with a Body Mass Index over
Page 3 of 4
§ 3.10 AMA Guides Chapter 10: The Endocrine System
25 who has high triglycerides greater than 130, triglyceride/HDL ratio greater than 3.0 and insulin greater than 108
mg/dL.
Remember, risk factors are only risk factors and are not “pathology.” So just because a person has a family history
of Type 2 diabetes, is Hispanic, is obese (BMI is at or over 30), is sedentary with minimal exercise and has a high
fat diet does not mean he or she will develop Type 2 diabetes. See the discussion about risk factors in Chapter 8 of
this guidebook
The proper treatment protocol for Type 2 diabetes is if the person has mildly elevated blood glucose levels then he
or she should be placed on a trial of diet and exercise. If that does not work then diet, exercise and a single oral
drug therapy should be introduced. If lifestyle changes are not sufficient, then multiple oral medications are needed
and if two or more drugs in combination do not work then insulin should be prescribed. The term “lifestyle changes”
refer to moderate to no use of alcohol, moderate daily exercise, proper diet (low fat, moderate carbs with whole
grain, fruits) and no smoking.
Diabetes mellitus can result in damage to the vascular system causing damage to the eyes (diabetic retinopathy
where small blood vessels bleed damaging the retina), kidney failure and peripheral neuropathies. Recent findings
also suggest diabetics have a high incidence of hearing loss compared to the general age-adjusted population due
to damage to the nerves that control hearing.
A diabetic does have a higher incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome, but be careful of this medical conclusion in a
workers’ compensation case. Diabetic peripheral polyneuropathies are felt first in the feet and later in the upper
extremities. When a diabetic peripheral polyneuropathy occurs in the upper extremities, all major nerve distributions
are affected (median, ulnar, and radial nerves) and not just one of them. The hands and feet are affected in a
stocking glove distribution with paresthesias (pins and needles), dysesthesias (unusual sensations), loss of sense
of touch, vibration, pain or temperature. An EMG/NCV study will be able to detect a diabetic polyneuropathy that
may or may not be superimposed on a median or ulnar nerve entrapment condition (carpal tunnel syndrome or
epichondylitis).
There is direct evidence that both types of diabetes mellitus can be drug induced:
• Glucosteriods and Corticosteroids such as prednisone (used for infections and as an anti-inflammatory)
• Beta-blockers (used for certain heart conditions)
• Protease inhibitors (used for HIV infection prevention)
• Therapeutic dosages of niacin (used for certain heart conditions)
This raises an interesting issue—can diabetes mellitus be related to an industrial injury? It appears that the
consensus among endocrinologists is that diabetes cannot be directly caused by an injury or by stress unless there
is direct trauma to the pancreas or brain damage. However, if an injured worker is taking medication for an
industrially related medical condition, such as taking niacin for a heart condition, and diabetes develops because of
the medication, then there may be an industrially related diabetic condition. Similarly, if a diabetic has sporatic
eating habits or does not routinely test his or her blood sugar levels as required due to a work schedule (e.g.,
firefighters, police officers, movie production workers) there may be an industrially related aggravation of the
employee’s diabetes.
Similarly, we have seen many cases over the years where a person is not at any significant risk for developing
diabetes, has a proper diet, exercises regularly and otherwise has a positive lifestyle, but then sustains a serious
back injury resulting in failed lumbar syndrome, a completely changed lifestyle, depression and a concomitant
weight gain of 100 lbs, which then evolves into Type 2 diabetes. Is the diabetes work related? Arguably the diabetic
condition may be indirectly related to the industrial injury, but there has to be credible medical evidence with a
thorough history taken and a proper medical-legal analysis to establish any relationship between the diabetic
condition and the industrial injuries.
Page 4 of 4
§ 3.10 AMA Guides Chapter 10: The Endocrine System
We have also seen cases where treatment of diabetes that is clearly non-industrial is necessary to properly treat an
industrially related medical condition. Case law supports treatment of non-industrial conditions on an industrial basis
if doing so is necessary in order to properly treat an industrially related condition [see Braewood Convalescent
Hospital v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Bolton) (1983) 34 Cal. 3d 159, 48 Cal. Comp. Cases 566].
Can emotional stress affect the course of diabetes mellitus? This is a controversial issue that has vexed the
workers’ compensation community for years, including before the enactment of SB 899. In the medical literature,
there are disagreements on both sides of the debate as to the role, if any, of physical and emotional stress on the
natural course of diabetes mellitus. There is no clear cut answer and in any given case, the parties must develop
the record in order to present the arguments to the judge so that a proper decision can be made that is based upon
reasonable medical probability and medical conclusions that constitute substantial medical evidence
Counsel needs to become familiar with the disease process and how external factors may affect the onset and
course of diabetes mellitus. You must always be prepared to develop the record if you claim that an injured worker’s
diabetes mellitus was caused, aggravated or accelerated by an industrial injury.
Also make sure that if you have a case where diabetes mellitus is caused, aggravated or accelerated by an
industrial injury, you rate all consequences of the disease. The diabetic condition itself is ratable in Chapter 10 of
the AMA Guides, cardio-vascular disease is rated in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 of the AMA Guides, diabetic
retinopathy is rated in Chapter 12 of the AMA Guides, kidney abnormalities are rated in Chapter 7 of the AMA
Guides, and peripheral neuropathies are rated in Chapters 13, 16, and 17 of the AMA Guides. Under Chapter 2 of
the AMA Guides and the 2005 PDRS, you combine all of the ratings after adjustment from WPI to permanent
disability.
The FEC adjustment for diabetes from Chapter 10 of the AMA Guides is a ranking of [2]. See the 2005 PDRS, page
2-2. Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of
1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.11
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.11 AMA Guides Chapter 11: Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 11.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 11: EAR, NOSE, THROAT, AND RELATED STRUCTURES
• HEARING LOSS
• SPEECH DEFICITS
• VOCAL CORD DAMAGE
• LABYRINTHITIS
• VESTIBULAR DISORDERS (DIZZINESS, BALANCE)
• CANCER
• TMJ (TEMPORAL-MANDUBULAR JOINT) DISORDERS
• VERTIGO
• POSTURAL INSTABILITY (BALANCE AND STATION DISORDERS)
• DISFIGUREMENT
AMA Guides Chapter 11 covers the ear, nose, throat, and related structures. This chapter deals with permanent
impairments involving hearing loss, speech and voice deficits, facial deformities/disfigurement, and shortness of
breath caused by upper respiratory illness or injuries that are not caused by lower respiratory deficits (lung disease
for example).
For hearing loss, use Tables 11-1, 11-2, and 11-3 on pages 247, 248, and 250, respectively. A person with 100%
hearing loss has a 35% WPI. Counsel must make sure that the treating or evaluating physician follows the
instructions on pages 246–250 of the AMA Guides in every hearing loss case. Section 11.2 mandates that the
physician perform the assessment for hearing loss as follows:
1. No use of assistive devices (i.e., hearing aids) during the assessment of permanent impairment for hearing
loss.
2. In calculation of a hearing impairment, do not correct for presbycusis (age-related hearing loss) because you
want an accurate measurement of actual loss of hearing and worry about apportionment later.
3. Test each ear separately with pure tone audiometer and record the hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and
3000 Hz. Anything measured over 100 dB is rated at “100 dB” and anything measured under 0 dB is rated
at “0 dB.”
Page 2 of 3
§ 3.11 AMA Guides Chapter 11: Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures
4. ADD the four hearing levels (dB) for each ear separately.
5. Refer to Table 11-1 to determine the percentages of monaural hearing impairment for each ear.
6. Refer to Table 11-2 to convert the monaural hearing impairment percentages to a binaural hearing
impairment rating. The footnote under Table 11-2 says: “The axes are the sum of hearing levels at 500,
1000, 2000 and 3000 Hz. The sum for the worse ear is read at the side; the sum of the better ear is at the
bottom. At the intersection of the row for the worse ear and the column for the better ear is the hearing
impairment (%).”
7. Refer to Table 11-3 to convert binaural hearing impairment to whole person impairment.
8. Add up to 5% WPI for tinnitus in the presence of a measurable hearing loss if the tinnitus impacts the ability
to perform ADLs. (See page 246, AMA Guides, Section 11.2a).
The FEC adjustments for Chapter 11, Ear, Nose, Throat and Related Structures are a ranking of [8] for hearing loss
and vestibular disorders and a [2] for facial cosmetic deformities, upper respiratory disorders, chewing and
swallowing disorders, loss of olfactory functioning (smelling) and voice and speech impairments. These FEC
adjustments are the same for both the 2005 PDRS, page 2-2.
Vestibular disturbances involve conditions, such as vertigo (dizziness), problems with balance, lightheadedness, or
other postural instability. Table 11-4 on page 253 covers whole person impairments for vestibular conditions
including dizziness. You should consider using this chapter in a post-concussion syndrome case if there is vertigo
or similar symptoms that affect a person’s ADLs (remember, driving is a common ADL).
Table 11-5 on page 256 covers facial disfigurement and encourages the physician to also consider psychiatric
conditions (in AMA Guides Chapter 14) that probably accompany severe facial disfigurements. Again, note the
variations within the classes of impairment for facial disfigurements. If you have a case that involves any kind of
facial disfigurement, you should also rate the case under AMA Guides Chapter 8, Sections 8.2 and 8.3, pages 175
and 176. However, ratings under Chapter 8 (The Skin) usually do not involve functional impairments caused by the
disfigurement, but only cosmetic ones, while Chapter 11 of the AMA Guides covers functional impairments caused
by a disfiguring injury to the facial structures. If WPI ratings are different between those derived from Chapter 11
from those derived from Chapter 8, you use the highest ratings pursuant to the instructions from Chapter 2 of the
AMA Guides, provided that both methods are accurate and reliable.
COMMON MISTAKE:
If counsel is prosecuting a facial disfigurement case, i.e., a high impact/high velocity injury, then you must be
cognizant of the high probability that there is also a cervical spinal injury or other parts of body injured that
are not that obvious. Always be vigilant in establishing parts of body injured in serious injury cases. Brain
injuries, such as post-concussion syndrome, and orthopedic injuries, such as cervical spinal injuries, are
sometimes overlooked due to the direct and immediate attention by reconstructive surgeons for facial
injuries. Traumatic injuries to the face often also include injuries to the cervical spine and brain injury in the
form of post-concussion syndrome. These secondary injuries are often overlooked by initial medical
providers who pay initial attention only to the facial injury.
Despite the reference to dyspnea in AMA Guides Chapter 5, there is a more extensive description of the disorder
due to upper respiratory system conditions. Remember, dyspnea is shortness of breath and can be very disabling if
it occurs at rest and with exertion. Table 11-6 on page 260 describes the whole person impairments for shortness of
breath and should be used along with AMA Guides Chapter 5, if appropriate. The authors of the AMA Guides make
a distinction between dyspnea that is caused by reduced lung function (see AMA Guides Chapter 5 for obstructive
and restrictive respiratory disorders and asthma), while Chapter 11 of the AMA Guides covers shortness of breath
that is caused by upper airway disorders such as damage to the larynx or any other part of the upper airway. Sleep
apnea is rated under AMA Guides Chapter 5, not Chapter 11.
Page 3 of 3
§ 3.11 AMA Guides Chapter 11: Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures
Example 11-18 in AMA Guides Chapter 11, page 262, is of a person with a temporomandibular joint disorder (TMJ)
that was caused by a dental procedure that resulted in reduced ability to chew food and severe jaw pain.
Tables 11-8 and 11-9 on page 265 cover speech disorders and provide five classes of impairments due to speech
deficits. Table 11-9 then converts the speech impairment to a whole person impairment. The AMA Guides give an
example of a rock and roll singer who has a 12% WPI due to the continuous trauma of being a rock singer. Table
11-10 on page 272 is the summary of ear, nose, and throat conditions and the reference to the tables for
determination of impairments.
See Example 5, in this guidebook at Ch. 5, § 5.05, of a voice/speech impairment case that utilizes Tables 11-8 and
11-9 for a school teacher who has residual symptoms after surgery to her vocal cords.
The FEC adjustments for Chapter 11, Ear, Nose, Throat and Related Structures, are a ranking of [8] for hearing
loss and vestibular disorders and a [2] for facial cosmetic disfigurements, upper respiratory disorders, chewing and
swallowing disorders, loss of olfactory functioning (smelling), and voice and speech impairments. See 2005 PDRS,
page 2-2. Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a
multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.12
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.12 AMA Guides Chapter 12: The Visual System

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 12.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 12: THE VISUAL SYSTEM
• LOSS OF VISUAL ACUITY
• LOSS OF FIELD OF VISION
• ENUCLEATION
• MACULAR DEGENERATION
• DIABETIC RETINOPATHIES
• DETACHED RETINA
AMA Guides Chapter 12 covers the visual system, which we rarely see in workers’ compensation cases. The AMA
Guides now use a Functional Vision Score instead of the Snell Visual Efficiency Scale. The bottom line is if you
have a loss of vision case, use a calculator. For visual acuity and visual field impairments, see Table 12-10 on page
298. The tables and figures are very complicated and most visual tests are automated. The tests for visual acuity
and field deficits are based on very objective evidence even in the absence of any kind of workers’ compensation
claim. All of the tables and testing for visual acuity, visual field, and visual system ratings lead to Table 12-10, and
the physician must follow the step-by-step instructions for each part of the rating as described in the text in Chapter
12 of the AMA Guides.
Visual acuity means the ability of the eye to perceive details, such as the ability to read and recognize faces. Visual
field refers to the ability to detect objects around the person within a visual periphery. Normal visual acuity is 20/60
or better, and “severe vision loss” (formerly called “legal blindness”) is 20/200 or worse. For those of you who try not
to flunk eye chart tests, know that if you get the majority of a line correct, then you will receive the visual acuity
score for that line. Impairment ratings are based upon the best uncorrected visual acuity. A person who is totally
blind in one eye, but who has normal vision in the other eye, has a 16% WPI rating.
The following discussion describes the use of Chapter 12 of the AMA Guides in more detail. The additional
information given here was prompted by a recent deposition of an ophthalmologist AME who, after 35 years of
medical practice, was not familiar with the requirements of Chapter 12 in determining permanent impairment
caused by a high velocity eye injury that resulted in a total loss of vision in one eye along with a cosmetic deformity
and nasal passage-way obstruction. This case has prompted the more detailed description of what the AMA Guides
require for a proper rating for an eye injury. The actual example will be discussed after the technical requirements
Page 2 of 7
§ 3.12 AMA Guides Chapter 12: The Visual System
embedded in Chapter 12 of the AMA Guides are discussed so that you can see, no pun intended, how this chapter
may apply in a workers’ compensation case.
Chapter 12 of the AMA Guides has a litany of abbreviations that are required for an understanding of how a visual
system impairment is determined. This alphabet soup requires some learning. First and most important is the
“Functional Vision Score” (FVS), which is an estimate of the effect of certain types of vision loss on the ability to
perform activities of daily living. The FVS is based upon visual acuity and visual field abilities. The FVS allows for
deficits of other visual functions, such as color vision, contrast and glare, binocular vision, stereopsis (three-
dimensional perception) and diplopia (double vision).
Visual Acuity is determined by a “Functional Acuity Score” (FAS) and visual field function is determined by a
“Functional Field Score” (FFS). Always confusing, unless you are a contact lens wearer, is the difference between
“OS,” “OD,” and “OU.” “OD” means the right eye (the word “derecho” means right in Spanish), “OS” means the left
eye, and “OU” means the function of both eyes combined (binocular vision). You will be required to make sure
physicians use the new formula for determination of visual impairment ratings, which shall be calculated using the
formula (3 × OU + OD + OS)/5.
The “Functional Vision Score” (FVS) is not a WPI rating—it shows a person’s ABILITY to see and function with a
visual impairment. The WPI is the simple math formula: WPI = 100 – FVS.
Table 12-1 on page 279 of the AMA Guides provides a flow chart on what the physician is required to do in order to
evaluate and calculate a person’s Functional Vision Score. The physician must follow the instructions within Table
12-1 and in the text in Section 12.1a on page 279 for a valid assessment.
The evaluating physician should perform the following steps:
1. Measure visual acuity and use Table 12-2 to convert each measured acuity values for OD, OS and OU to a
Visual Acuity Score (VAS).
2. Use Table 12-3 to combine visual acuity scores from each eye to determine a single Functional Acuity Score
(FAS). If there is no visual field loss, then the impairment rating is 100 – FAS.
3. Measure the visual fields using Table 12-5 or the detailed instructions in Section 12.3c to convert each of the
measured field values for OD, OS, and OU to a Visual Field Score (VFS).
4. Use Table 12-6 to combine the field scores for each eye to determine a single Functional Field Score (FFS).
5. Use the rules in Section 12.4, described below, to combine the Functional Acuity Score (FAS) and the
Functional Field Score (FFS) to determine a Functional Vision Score. (FVS).
6. Calculate WPI rating: 100 – FVS = WPI rating.
7. The impairment rating can be adjusted based upon individual visual impairments not included in the acuity
and field impairments by following the instructions in Section 12.4, page 296, of the AMA Guides.
The Functional Acuity Score (FAS) and the Functional Field Score (FFS) are weighted averages because a good
visual acuity or good visual field in one eye can compensate for loss of the same function in the other eye. In a case
where there is both loss of visual acuity and loss of field, you calculate the acuity and field vision ABILITY for each
eye and binocular vision and then follow the following combination formula:
FVS = (FAS × FFS)/100
So if the FAS is 80 (which is a 20% impairment because 100 – 80 = 20) and the FFS is 75 (which is a 25%
impairment because 100 – 75 = 25), the FVS is calculated as: 80% × 75% = 60%. The WPI is calculated as follows:
100 – 60 = 40% WPI
Section 12.4b on page 297 indicates that the physician has discretion to add up to 15% to the visual system
impairment rating (WPI) for the effects of factors on a person’s ADL functioning that are not included within the
Page 3 of 7
§ 3.12 AMA Guides Chapter 12: The Visual System
acuity and field scores. This would include consideration for color blindness, contrast or glare sensitivity,
binocularity, stereopsis and diplopia but the additional rating must be “well documented.”
There are sections throughout Chapter 12 of the AMA Guides that are mainly intended for the examining physician
to follow specific protocols for calculating the various visual acuity and field scores. There is a separate section on
calculating a person’s reading ability, which relates to visual acuity. Attorneys do not need to be too concerned
about the methods required in the AMA Guides to be used by an ophthalmologist in determining the visual acuity
and visual field scores or the diagnosis of the medical condition that causes any visual system impairments
because the diagnostic and examination protocols are standard throughout the medical specialty and are strictly
based on objective evidence.
For every eye injury case that you come across, you must review the physician’s conclusions in light of Table 12-10
on page 298 of the AMA Guides. Pay special attention to the footnote under Table 12-10 which states as follows:
The examples in this table refer to visual acuity loss alone or visual field loss alone. Use Tables 12-2, 12-3, 12-
5, and 12-6 and the rules in this section to calculate an impairment value when there is both visual acuity loss
and visual field loss. If VSI < 50% then WPI = VSI; If VSI is > 50%, WPI is adjusted based upon the formula
WPI = 50 + .07 × (VSI – 50).
Note that the AME mentioned above criticized the notion of a person having a “reserve capacity” or a loss of
“reserve capacity” because in his clinical practice for over 35 years, no one even mentions such a thing, except in
the context that if a person has only one functioning eye, he or she is at risk of losing the other eye if the person
engages in high risk activities, e.g., operates a grinder, plays tennis, racketball or baseball, or works in a dusty
environment. These factors would not be considered in increasing a WPI rating since these activities are not ADL
functions.
Examples 12-2 and 12-12 on pages 285 and 298, respectively, in the AMA Guides involve a person who has
completely lost sight in one eye. One eye lost and the other normal is a Class 2 impairment under Table 12-10 and
results in a 10–20% WPI, depending on the function of the remaining eye, and the effects of being blind in one eye
on the person’s ADL functioning. In both cases, the Functional Field Score (FFS) was not calculated because the
Visual Acuity Score (VFS) for the non-functional eye was 0. Since the loss of acuity was not independent from the
loss of field vision due to the total blindness of the one eye, the Functional Vision Score (FVS) will still be equal to
the Functional Acuity Score (FAS).
As is the case in other chapters of the AMA Guides, you should always refer to the examples given in the text to
see if your case is similar to any of them.
One example of work-related eye injury that prompted expansion of this section in this guidebook involved a 72-
year-old gas station clerk who was assaulted by gang members who struck him repeatedly in the face, resulting in a
fractured nose, fractured xygomatic process, fractured right eye orbit and total loss of sight in the right eye. The
Applicant had multiple reconstructive surgeries by plastic surgeons and ophthalmologists but the Applicant was left
with “hand movement” vision only (near total blindness) in the right eye, air flow restriction in the right nostril and an
obvious cosmetic deformity in that the eyes were asymmetrical (the right eye clearly was depressed into the eye
orbit and was lower than the left eye).
The AME in ophthalmology opined that the Applicant’s condition resulted in a 20% WPI from Table 12-10 due to the
loss of function to the right eye. He properly calculated the Functional Acuity Score, which equaled 80%, and based
upon the footnote under Table 12-10, the Applicant has a 20% visual system impairment, which is a WPI of 20%.
Chapter 2 of the AMA Guides advises physicians that ratings can be combined if a medical condition results in
multi-region impairments, such as in cases of diabetes that can affect a person’s kidneys, blood pressure, heart,
peripheral nervous system and eyes. See Ch. 3, § 3.02 of this guidebook. Similarly, the authors in Chapter 12 of the
AMA Guides remind the physician that other impairments can be combined with the visual system impairment
ratings where appropriate.
Page 4 of 7
§ 3.12 AMA Guides Chapter 12: The Visual System
The AME was reluctant to assign an impairment for the air flow impairment as a result of the right nostril damage
under Chapter 11 of the AMA Guides, page 260, Table 11-6 because he is not an Ear, Nose and Throat specialist
who is more qualified to determine any impairment as a result of this aspect of the case. However, the AME could
have applied Table 11-6 only if both nostrils are permanently blocked and air flow restriction is completely total from
the nose.
In addition, the AME was able to apply Table 11-5 on page 256 of the AMA Guides that the Applicant has a
borderline Class 2 to Class 3 impairment due to his facial deformity. Class 2 is a 0 to 10% WPI and is defined as:
Facial abnormality involves loss of the supporting structure on part of the face with or without cutaneous
disorder, e.g., depressed cheek, nasal or frontal bones.
A Class 3, which is 11% WPI to 29% WPI, is defined as:
Facial abnormality involves absence of normal anatomic part of area or face, such as loss of eye or loss of part
of the nose with a resulting cosmetic deformity combined with any functional loss, e.g., vision or severe
unilateral total facial paralysis.
It was clear from the photographs of the Applicant and the AME’s recollection of the Applicant that he assigned a
10% WPI due to the cosmetic deformities caused by the assault and which was combined with the rating for the
visual system impairment. The point of this example is that counsel should always be aware of any ancillary
impairments that occur as a result of a serious injury such as what occurred here. The case presented primarily as
an eye injury, but the assault actually resulted in two out of three possible separate but combined impairment
ratings—loss of visual acuity, cosmetic disfigurement and blocked nasal passages.
Two other eye injury cases that have occurred since 2005 also resulted in AME or QME evaluations that did not
properly apply Chapter 12 of the AMA Guides. One involved a prison psychologist who was assaulted by an inmate
and who developed post-traumatic glaucoma with partial losses of visual acuity and visual field combined with a
psychiatric impairment rating. The other case involved an employee who developed partial blindness due to optical
neuritis from exposure to highly toxic chemicals and solvents while he was working for a motorcycle parts
manufacturer.
The noteworthy panel decision of Ortega v. Building Technologies, Inc. [2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 395]
provides guidance on how to rate WPI for vision loss as a result of an industrial eye injury. In Ortega, the applicant
suffered a significant injury on October 21, 2004, when a metal strap with an attached screw snapped free and
punctured his right eye. Although he underwent multiple surgeries to the right eye, he had significant impairment to
his vision in that eye, approaching blindness. At the time of his injury, the vision in his left uninjured eye was 20/20.
But by the time his right eye injury became permanent and stationary, he had started to develop glaucoma in his left
uninjured eye. As a result, the vision in his left eye was substantially compromised.
The applicant’s QME in this case, Dr. Vishteh, attempted to follow the instructions from the AMA Guides when it
came time to rate applicant’s eye injury. The AMA Guides explain at page 277 that rating for the “visual system is
unique in that it combines input from two separate eyes into a single visual perception.” Since the AMA Guides are
focused on rating impairments in a uniform measurable fashion to determine the impact of the injury on the worker’s
ADLs, they utilize the subjective ophthalmological measurement tools of organ function for “visual acuity” and
“visual field.”
Visual acuity is defined by the AMA Guides at page 603 as, “The ability to recognize small objects at high contrast,
such as letters on a letter chart … This ability is important for ADL tasks such as reading.” Visual field is defined by
the AMA Guides at page 603 as, “The ability to detect objects in the periphery of the visual environment … This
ability is important for ADL tasks such as orientation and mobility.”
The strict AMA Guides rating for vision loss is calculated by combining measurements of both eyes as set forth in
Section 12.4 at page 296 et seq. The WCAB explained the rating process as follows:
Page 5 of 7
§ 3.12 AMA Guides Chapter 12: The Visual System
In cases such as this one, where applicant has impairment to both visual acuity and visual field, Chapter 12.4 is
the proper method for rating the impairment of the vision system. (Id. at Chapter 12.4, p. 296.) Using this
method, the evaluator must provide three measurements for visual acuity and three measurements for visual
field. (Id. at p. 296.) For both acuity and visual, the evaluator measures the right eye, the left eye, and then
binocular vision. (Id. at Table 12-3, p. 284, and Table 12-6 p. 289.) These measurements are put into a
formula, which is weighted heavily toward the binocular measurement. (Id.) The formula multiplies the binocular
measurement by three and then adds the monocular measurements of each individual eye. (Id.) This result is
then averaged and further computed to determine the final whole person impairment of the visual system. (Id.
at p. 296.)
The applicant’s case was complicated by the fact that he had vision loss in both eyes, but only the right eye’s vision
impairment was due to industrial factors. Dr. Vishteh realized that it was his obligation to rate the WPI of Mr.
Ortega’s right eye in accordance with the instructions of the AMA Guides. But he also knew that Labor Code § 4663
mandates that he apportion permanent disability between industrial and non-industrial factors.
Therefore, Dr. Vishteh offered an “alternate” rating to compensate for apportionment to the non-industrial
deterioration of the left eye. In his WPI calculation, Dr. Vishteh attempted to “back out” the non-industrial disability to
the applicant’s left eye. Unfortunately, his “alternate” rating missed the mark as far as what is legally mandated in
these types of cases.
The WCAB explained the fallacy behind the QME’s process as follows:
On the surface, it would appear as if this method properly deducted any non-industrial disability from
applicant’s rating. However, because applicant is near blind in his industrial eye and because the eyes are
intertwined and work together as a group, the cause of applicant’s binocular vision loss is industrial. It was error
for the QME to adjust applicant’s binocular measurements with fictitious values in rating his disability.
The WCAB held that the appropriate way to rate the visual system when there is loss of vision in the left eye due to
non-industrial causes and no vision in the right eye due to industrial causes is as follows:
In order to determine what, if any, disability should be discounted from applicant’s left eye alone, we must
calculate disability assigning a 20/20 vision score, or 100, to applicant’s monocular vision in the left eye only.
We will assign the values as determined by the QME for applicant’s right eye and binocular vision, both of
which are industrially injured. The disability is calculated as follows:
Functional Acuity Score (FAS) Calculation per table 12–3, p. 284 of AMA Guides
OU = 80 × 3 = 240
OD = 25
OS = 100
240+100+25 = 365 / 5 = FAS of 73
Functional Field Score (FFS) Calculation per table 12–6, p. 289 of AMA Guides
OU = 70 × 3 = 210
OD = 15
OS = 100
210+100+15 = 325 / 5 = FFS of 65
Functional Vision Score (FVS) Calculation per chapter 12.4a.1, p. 296 of AMA Guides
(FAS 73 × FFS 65) / 100 = FVS of 47 = 53% whole person impairment (WPI)”
The WPI of 53% was added to the 3% pain assessment for a total WPI of 56%. Once the WPI was determined, it
was inserted into the rating string as follows:
12.03.00.00 – 56 – [1]62 – 380H – 68 = 70%
Page 6 of 7
§ 3.12 AMA Guides Chapter 12: The Visual System
Evaluating physicians have a variety of complex and confusing tasks to perform. First, they must determine
causation of injury. Later, when the worker becomes permanent and stationary, they must then determine causation
of disability. These are two totally different types of causation, with two totally different types of analysis. However,
physicians often miss this distinction and treat these different legal standards as identical, often causing their
reports to not constitute substantial evidence.
Similarly, physicians are required to rate an injured worker’s WPI, but then later apportion PD between industrial
and non-industrial factors. WPI is just one component of PD. In the instant case, the PQME attempted to illegally
apportion PD using the WPI calculation.
It is up to the lawyers in each case to note whether the physician has applied the correct legal standard, and, if not,
to bring this to the evaluator’s attention [see Gay v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1979) 96 Cal. App. 3d 555, 158
Cal. Rptr. 137, 44 Cal. Comp. Cases 817 (physicians in workers’ compensation matters must be educated by
parties on correct legal standards of apportionment; here, failure of physician to discuss apportionment in terms of
the proper legal standard was not actually his fault but that of the parties)].
Attorneys must be vigilant in checking the work of the evaluating physicians. They must alert them as to key legal
issues, such as the distinction between WPI and PD. If an evaluating physician wishes to use an alternate rating
method than that of the strict rating of the AMA Guides, the physician must follow a strict protocol for doing so. The
physician must first offer a strict AMA Guides rating. Next, the physician must explain how and why that rating is not
accurate. Finally, the physician must explain how and why an alternate rating within the four corners of the guides is
more accurate. Failure of attorneys to educate the physicians as to these key legal standards may well result in
adverse results at the trial level.
Work related eye injuries occur too frequently and counsel’s familiarity with the complexities of Chapter 12 will result
in higher quality medical reporting since it appears that development of the record will be necessary from a medical-
legal standpoint in most if not all of these cases. Also, remember that Labor Code § 4656(c) does not limit payment
of temporary total disability benefits for 104 weeks in high velocity eye injury cases.
In fact a case that was decided by the Appeals Board in a noteworthy panel decision is Glick v. Knight-Swift
Transportation Holdings, Inc. [(2022) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases 145, 2022 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 306 (Appeals
Board noteworthy panel decision)], which involves the question of the definition of what constitutes a “high-velocity
eye injury” pursuant to Labor Code Section 4656(c)(3)(F), which allows up to 240 compensable weeks of temporary
total disability benefits (TTD) instead of only 104 weeks of TTD. This case demonstrates what is advised to counsel
who read this guidebook—always pay attention to the mechanism of injury.
In this case, the injured worker claimed injuries to his left knee, lumbar spine, neurological system, and
“ophthalmology/vision/eye” when he was hit by a car that was traveling 30 miles per hour at the time of impact. The
injury occurred on November 26, 2018. The injured worker was thrown about 10 feet, landing on the ground on his
left side. He was knocked unconscious, taken to a hospital, and diagnosed with a fractured left tibia, left fibula, left
femur, right scapula, right clavicle, right and left temporal bones, L1, L2, L3, and L4 vertebrae and a left “brain
bleed.” He had nerve damage behind his right eye.
Dr. Mechel Henry was the QME in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation who noted in a report dated June 9, 2020,
that the injured worker remained TTD. Dr. David Sami, a QME in ophthalmology, noted a history of right
hemisphere subarachnoid hemorrhage and fractures of the right and left temporal bones, post-concussive
symptoms including double vision. He opined that the Applicant has post-traumatic strabismus requiring surgery
and continues to be TTD as of his report dated August 17, 2020. On November 11, 2020, Dr. Valerie Quan, treating
ophthalmologist, diagnosed the Applicant with diplopia on both eyes at distance and near, convergence
insufficiency and right hyper-tropia, as well as acquired strabismus related to trauma.
At an expedited hearing on December 17, 2020, which was more than two years post injury, the parties went to trial
on the issue of whether the Applicant sustained a “high velocity eye injury” entitling him to up to 240 weeks of TTD
under Labor Code Section 4656(c)(3)(F). The trial judge, upheld by the Appeals Board on reconsideration, held that
Page 7 of 7
§ 3.12 AMA Guides Chapter 12: The Visual System
the injured worker did sustain a high velocity eye injury, entitling him to continuing TTD beyond the two-year
limitation and up to 240 weeks. Defendants had contended that a “high velocity eye injury” requires at least some
direct impact to the eye globe. This argument was rejected by the trial judge and Appeals Board panel who
indicated a direct trauma to the eyeball is not necessary to sustain a finding of a “high velocity eye injury.”
The Appeals Board panel in Glick cited Glover v. ACCU Construction [2009 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 301
(Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)] where a metal fragment from a high speed machine entered the injured
worker’s nostril, fracturing his eye socket and traveling through his brain and lodging in the back of his skull.
Defendants argued that there was no direct injury to the injured worker’s eye globe, and, therefore, there was not a
“high velocity eye injury” that justified up to 240 weeks of TTD. The trial judge and Appeals Board rejected that
argument and ordered additional TTD benefits. The Appeals Board panel stated: “We are not persuaded that ‘eye’
should be defined so narrowly, yet we need not delineate the outer limits of our definition at this time.” The Appeals
Board panel then described in detail the treatment the injured worker received, including to his right eye where the
medical records showed treatment for the laceration, repair, medication, and other treatment specifically for the eye.
In the Glick case the Appeals Board stated: “Thus, although the initial medical reports in Glover did not identify
injury to the organ of the eye [italics by the Appeals Board], we were persuaded that the evidence of subsequent
medical treatment to the eye was sufficient to establish an ‘eye injury.’” See Glick, 88 Cal. Comp. Cases at 152.
After reciting the extensive diagnosis and treatment rendered to Mr. Glick in his case, the Appeals Board stated:
“We are thus persuaded that applicant’s significant and documented complaints of altered vision, strabismus, and
eye pain and discomfort support the WCJ’s determination that applicant sustained an eye injury as a result of his
industrial injury generally…However we note that ‘velocity’ is defined in the Merriman-Webster dictionary as
‘quickness of motion, rapidity of movement or the speed imparted to something’ or ‘the rate of rapidity of occurrence
or action.’’ We observe that applicant’s industrial injury directly compromised applicant’s vision, resulting in the need
for a surgical repair to the muscles of the eye to correct for the alignment of the eyes and to address applicant’s
diplopia.” Id at 88 Cal. Comp. Cases 153.
Both the Glover and Glick cases involved serious and debilitating injuries—catastrophic in fact, that justifies the
extension of 104 weeks of TTD to up to 240 weeks under Labor Code Section 4656. These two cases resolve the
issue of to what extent the legislature intended to extend TTD beyond the limitation of 104 weeks for high velocity
eye injuries. In addition, any time eye sight is significantly and traumatically altered by injury, infection, or brain
injury a person’s adaptation to altered vision takes a significant amount of time to adjust, alter, or eliminate activities
of daily living.
The FEC adjustment for any visual system deficit is a ranking of [1]. See the 2005 PDRS, page 2-2. The FEC
adjustment for the cosmetic disfigurement is a ranking of [2] under the 2005 PDRS. Remember, the adjustment
factor for all parts of body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each
WPI rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.13
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 13.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 13: THE CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
• SLEEP DISORDERS
• HEAD INJURIES
• REGIONAL PERIPHERAL NERVE (ENTIRE ARM OR LEG)
• CONCUSSIONS
• SLEEP APNEA
• NARCOLEPSY
• TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
• CEREBRAL VASCULAR ACCIDENTS (STROKES)
• TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ACCIDENTS
• SEIZURES
• DEMENTIA
• ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
• POST-TRAUMATIC EPILEPSY
• PARKINSON’S DISEASE
• TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA
• CHRONIC REGIONAL PAIN SYNDROME (CRPS)—RSD AND CAUSALGIA
• NEUROPATHIC AND CHRONIC PAIN DISORDERS
AMA Guides Chapter 13 on the central and peripheral nervous system is one of the most important chapters in the
Guides for our purposes as workers’ compensation attorneys. In most of our workers’ compensation cases, if there
is any evidence of sensory or motor deficits, regardless of the part of body injured (head, brain, back, neck, upper
extremities, lower extremities), then you should make sure the physician considers the criteria in this AMA Guides
Chapter 13 in addition to any other applicable AMA Guides chapter for the specific body part(s).
Page 2 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
AMA Guides Chapter 13 mostly covers the results of head injuries, strokes, seizures, spinal cord injuries, and the
severe consequences of those entities. However, the chapter also covers any kind of peripheral nerve condition,
regardless of the cause. Everything from carpal tunnel syndrome (median nerve) to elbow related disorders (ulnar
nerve) to diabetic neuropathies to sciatica (sciatic, tibial, and peroneal nerves) is covered by this chapter. See AMA
Guides, Section 13.9, pages 344–350.
Any type of neuropathic pain disorder, including complex regional pain (AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Section 13.8,
pages 343–344), are also covered in this chapter. The authors of AMA Guides Chapter 13 indicate that these
impairments do not take into account a person’s concurrent depression and anxiety, which should be evaluated
separately in AMA Guides Chapter 14 (mental and behavioral disorders). More on this later.
AMA Guides Chapter 13 covers all sensory deficits (feeling, perception, heat, cold, tactile discrimination) and motor
function (muscle power) deficits (grip loss, atrophy, gait disorders).
In summary, Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides have something for everyone. However, under current case law, the
physician must provide a strict WPI rating as the first step in determining an accurate permanent disability rating
(the judge decides the PD rating while the physician decides the WPI ratings). If the strict WPI rating is not
accurate, then the physician may utilize any chapter table or method within the four corners of the AMA Guides to
find the most accurate WPI ratings that reflect the effect of impairment on the injured worker’s ADL functioning and
work functioning. See Chapter 7 of this guidebook for a discussion of rebutting a permanent disability rating, and
Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) [(2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837 (Guzman III)].
Guzman III issues arise in this chapter all the time because it is written by authors different than those who wrote
the orthopedic Chapters 15, 16, and 17. The basic rule is for any head injury case, use Chapter 13 first, but don’t
forget about other Chapters that may apply in a case. Also assume that with any head or facial trauma, there may
be also co-morbidity—a cervical spine injury that would be rated separately under Chapter 15 of the Guides as a
first step.
You cannot thoroughly learn Chapter 13 without going through each table individually and closely following the text.
While WPI ratings throughout the AMA Guides refer to impairments based on anatomic loss, diagnosis based, or
functional loss, WPI ratings under Chapter 13 of the Guides are based almost entirely on functional deficits.
In light of the Administrative Director’s rules on the use of the AMA Guides in the 2005 PDRS, you need to refer to
AMA Guides Chapters 13, 14, and 18, respectively, for neuropathic pain syndromes, the psychiatric sequelae of
same, and any pain related impairments that have a greater than expected effect on the person’s ADL functioning
than the impairment rating that applies under the appropriate part of body or organ function chapter in the AMA
Guides. You will see under AMA Guides Chapter 18 that if there is pain related impairments where the majority of
which are caused by psychological factors, then you use AMA Guides Chapter 14. On the other hand, if the pain
related impairments have a concordant, credible pathophysiological basis, then you use AMA Guides Chapter 18.
In Example 4, in this guidebook at Ch. 5, § 5.04, you will see where there is a pain increase under AMA Guides
Chapter 18, along with a psychiatric condition under AMA Guides Chapter 14 that results in a separate WPI rating.
Chapter 13 defines the “central nervous system” to include the brain and spinal cord. Remember, the spinal cord is
separate and distinct from the lumbar, thoracic, and cervical “spine,” which refers to the bones, ligaments, discs,
and other structures that surround and protect the spinal cord. Chapter 13 requires following the instructions in the
text very carefully, especially for a strict WPI rating.
The authors of AMA Guides got sneaky in this chapter. Tables 13-15 through 13-21 on pages 336–342 are identical
to corticospinal DRE ratings in Table 15-6 on pages 396–397. Or maybe they got sneaky in Chapter 15 using
ratings from Chapter 13?
What is particularly vexing about reading and understanding Chapter 13 of the Guides is that physicians read the
text, tables, and figures scientifically. Attorneys read the text, tables, and figures like attorneys—each word means
something and is subject to interpretation.
Page 3 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
The most comprehensive part of AMA Guides Chapter 13 involves injuries to the central nervous system. This part
applies in head injury cases, such as post-concussion syndromes, strokes, traumatic epilepsy, seizure disorders, or
any other brain injury. The effect of some injuries to the central nervous system to a person’s ADLs can be
devastating. AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Section 13.1a, page 306, which describes in detail the symptoms that can
be caused by a nervous system disorder, is a laundry list of symptoms that you can see in all other chapters of the
AMA Guides.
On page 306 of the AMA Guides, the authors state:
A permanent neurologic impairment is any anatomic, physiological, or functional abnormality or loss that
remains after MMI. If impairments involve several nervous system areas (e.g. the brain, spinal cord, and/or
peripheral nerves), calculate separate WPI ratings for each area and combine them.
This is not correct in California because the 2005 PDRS mandates that each part of body be rated from WPI to
permanent disability and thereafter combined, because each part of body may have a separate and different DFEC
adjustment factor. See Chapter 2 of this guidebook on how to combine ratings of different parts of body injured.
The authors go on to state on page 306:
Because brain dysfunction will likely affect many overlapping functions, identify the most severe cerebral
impairment. The impairment rating is based on the most severe impairment.
You will see below how this quote becomes controversial in obtaining a strict rating. Section 13.1a covers the usual
signs and symptoms of brain injuries resulting in generalized or focal symptoms. Generalized symptoms are not
localized to any one part of the body, while focal symptoms are limited to a specific area of the body. The term focal
also refers to brain damage in a specific, identifiable area of the brain, such as a hemorrhage or contusion, while
generalized brain damage refers to the entire brain or multiple parts thereof, such as with some forms of dementia.
It appears from a reading of the text in AMA Guides, Chapter 13, that the tables, figures, and examples can be used
for stand-alone medical conditions other than a global brain or spinal cord injury. For example, Table 13-4 on page
317 covers impairments due to sleep and arousal disorders, and Example 13-17, page 318, is an impairment rating
using Table 13-4 for sleep apnea, which is a stand-alone diagnosis and is not a result of a head injury in this
example. Example 13-19 on the same page covers an impairment rating using the same Table 13-4 for narcolepsy
(which is a condition that can be caused by reading this guidebook for too long at one time).
There is a list of signs, symptoms, and complaints associated with a brain injury or other disease or damage to the
central nervous system from page 306 of the AMA Guides:
• Symptoms of brain injuries include:
– Alterations in levels of consciousness
– Memory loss, difficulty with language
– Headache, fatigue, weakness of limb or limbs
– Difficulty walking, loss of coordination
– Loss of bladder/bowel control
– Shooting pain, numbness, tingling in an extremity
– Sexual dysfunction
– Blurred or double vision (Page 306)
This list is not all inclusive because every brain injury is different and presents a variety of symptoms, changes in
behavior, altered personality, altered moods, and cognitive deficits, such as difficulties with concentration, memory,
and judgment. The authors state:
Page 4 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
Many of these symptoms describe the functional impairment experienced by the individual. The neurologic
evaluation and ancillary clinical testing determine the origin of these symptoms.
The authors go on to state a very important point without saying why the point is important [AMA Guides, p. 306]:
When this information is subjective and open to misinterpretation, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon
which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, obtain objective data about the severity of the findings
and the limitations and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent
impairment.
This instruction is important because so many of the effects of a brain injury are subjective and impossible to
objectively test. A closed head injury, one without a skull fracture, can have devastating effects on a person without
any significant objective medical findings. So the physician must use what diagnostic tools that are available to him
or her and try to objectify the cause of the symptoms, if possible, by some organicity. If there is no organicity, the
physician must use his or her clinical judgment and experience to determine what he or she sees is from a brain
injury.
Then the authors indicate the type of testing that should occur to determine the existence of a brain injury and the
effects of it on the patient. Section 13.1b sets forth required clinical studies, including the neurological exam that
identifies, if possible, the location of nervous system impairment. Ancillary testing (anatomic or physiologic)
identifies the severity and location of the lesion and confirms underlying pathology. You cannot rate based on test
results alone because the brain can compensate and ADLs may not be affected.
Neuropsychological assessment for cognitive and behavioral alterations should be conducted for the non-organic
manifestations of brain injuries. These neuropsychological studies cannot be relied on alone to draw any
conclusions about the cause of changes in behavior or psychiatric status. The authors tell us that
neuropsychological evaluations must be performed in all brain injury cases, if possible, but the results must be
interpreted with clinical findings and test results together. Neuropsychological test results do not form the basis of a
diagnosis (e.g., dementia and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) may have the same findings on tests) and cannot
determine the cause of a problem.
What is interesting about the central nervous system chapter is that the authors advocate use of tests we find in
other chapters of the AMA Guides. Lumbar puncture (spinal tap, not a 1980s rock group) is recommended for a
diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis (MS), infections, and some peripheral nerve diseases. Evoked potentials for MS,
optical neuritis, and neurotoxin exposures are recommended. Carotid duplex/Doppler flow for stenosis in carotid
artery and for any kind of cerebro-vascular disease is recommended. CT scanning, including CT myelograms, are
also recommended, presumably for confirmation of damage to the spinal cord.
The following tests are also recommended for organic diagnosis for either brain damage or spinal cord involvement:
MRI or MRA (MR angiogram); PET Scans—mostly research in 2000, now used to show brain function, can show
Parkinson’s disease; and SPECT testing, which shows changes in blood flow and metabolism that may account for
abnormalities from dementia and neurodegenerative diseases. In addition, EMG (electromyelography) and nerve
conduction velocity studies are necessary for determination of any peripheral nervous system disorders.
In AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Section 13.2, page 308, there is a step-by-step analysis of a person’s central nervous
system impairment that is required in all cases. The central nervous system consists of the brain and spinal cord.
The physician must assess the most severe of four categories of impairment based upon a neurological evaluation:
• State of consciousness and level of awareness—whether permanent or episodic
• Mental status evaluation and integrative functioning
• Use and understanding of language
• Influence of behavior and mood
Page 5 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
The instructions in the AMA Guides make it very clear that for any central nervous system case, the physician must
evaluate the four cerebral impairment factors listed above, and then take the highest WPI rating for one of them.
That highest WPI rating for cerebral impairment is the only one that is rated of the four factors [see AMA Guides, p.
308]:
The most severe of these four categories should be used to determine a cerebral impairment rating. Motor,
sensory systems, gait, and coordination are evaluated separately.
Once the cerebral impairment is evaluated, the physician must evaluate sensory and motor systems, gait, and
coordination. The authors of the AMA Guides list the five steps in evaluating cerebral impairment as follows:
1. Evaluate level of consciousness, awareness, and arousal, and whether the impairment is permanent or
intermittent using Tables 13-2 on page 309 (Criteria for Rating Impairment of Consciousness and
Awareness), Table 13-3 on page 312 (Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Episodic Loss of
Consciousness or Awareness), and Table 13-4 on page 317 (Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Sleep
and Arousal Disorders).
2. Evaluate mental status and highest integrative functioning using Table 13-6 on page 320 (Criteria for Rating
Impairment Relating to Mental Status), which is based upon Table 13-5 (Clinical Dementia Rating) on the
same page.
3. Identify any difficulty with understanding and use of language using Table 13-7 on page 323 (Criteria for
Rating Impairment Due to Aphasia or Dysphasia).
4. Evaluate any emotional or behavioral disturbances that can modify cerebral function using Table 13-8 on
page 325 (Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Emotional or Behavioral Disorders).
5. Identify the most severe impairment from categories 1 through 4, above, and then combine with any other
neurological impairments that are listed in Table 13-1 on page 308 (cranial nerve impairments; station, gait,
and movement disorders; extremity disorders related to central impairment, spinal cord impairments,
chronic pain; and peripheral nerve, motor, and sensory impairments).
The most important thing to realize with this chapter is that if you have a true brain injury case, you must have both
a neurologist and neuropsychologist evaluate the injured worker, without exception. This is because the cerebral
impairments are rated separately from the physical effects of the brain injury on other functions, such as standing,
ambulating, muscle strength for both upper and lower extremities, paralysis, balance deficits, loss of sensation, and
other factors.
As with any WPI rating, you must wait until the injured worker is MMI for rating purposes. This is extremely
important in brain injury cases, such as traumatic brain injury or stroke cases, because, in general, a person’s brain
does not adequately adapt or stabilize from a brain injury or stroke for 10–12 months after the traumatic event
occurred.
In summary, for a Traumatic Brain Injury case, you must rate using Tables 13-2 through 13-8, take the highest WPI
rating from one of those Tables, and then combine with any other rating under the categories listed in Table 13-1. In
fact, as attorneys, if you prepare a case for deposition of a physician in a brain injury case, you must use Table 13-
1 as a checklist of possible additional impairments besides the cerebral impairments. So here is a checklist for any
brain injury case:
• Step 1: Use Tables 13-2, 13-3, 13-4 to determine impairment in consciousness, awareness, and arousal;
permanent or episodic alternations
• Step 2: Use Table 13-6 to rate mental status and highest integrative functioning
• Step 3: Use Table 13-7 to determine difficulty with understanding and use of language
• Step 4: Use Table 13-8 to evaluate any emotional or behavioral disturbances, such as depression
Page 6 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
• Step 5: Identify the most severe impairment from categories 1–4, and use Table 13-1 to find any other
impairment that is not listed in Steps 1–4
As you can see, brain and spinal cord injury cases result in significant impairment ratings since you take the most
severe cerebral based impairment and combine it with any other impairment that is caused by the brain or spinal
cord injury, such as muscle or sensory deficits for an upper and/or lower extremity.
For references, you must refer to Table 13-15 on page 336 in a stroke, spinal cord injury, or multiple sclerosis case
to evaluate a person’s station and gait disorder due to the stroke, spinal cord injury, or MS. Also see Tables 13-16
on page 338 (Criteria for Rating Impairment of One Upper Extremity), Table 13-17 on page 340 (Criteria for Rating
Impairment of Two Upper Extremities), Table 13-18 on page 341 (Criteria for Rating Neurologic Impairment of
Respiration), Table 13-19 on page 341 (Criteria for Rating Neurologic Impairment of the Bladder), Table 13-20 on
page 342 (Criteria for Rating Neurologic Anorectal Impairment [bowel incontinence]), and Table 13-21 on page 342
(Criteria for Rating Neurologic Sexual Impairment).
In every head injury, brain injury, or stroke case, the AMA Guides requires a two-fold analysis of permanent
impairment—any organic brain damage should be assessed by a neurologist. A neuropsychologist should then
evaluate and assess any cognitive and behavioral deficits. Every neurologist who has evaluated these cases has
indicated in his or her medical reports and deposition testimony that he or she is not qualified to determine any
cognitive deficits (memory—short term and long term, language, executive function, intelligence, motor speed, and
educational achievement) and behavioral deficits (changes in personality, mood, social skills, occupational skills).
The authors of the AMA Guides at page 319 identify who should be evaluated both neurologically and
neuropsychologically:
“Neurologic
deficits
that
have
different
behavioral
ramifications
amenable
to
neuropsychological evaluation include traumatic brain injury, dementia, Parkinson’s disease, HIV infection,
epilepsy, neurotoxic exposure, chronic pain, and personality assessment in individuals with neurologic disease.”
Notice here that the authors include a recommendation that a patient with “chronic pain” be evaluated by a
neurologist and a neuropsychologist. The school of thought here is that chronic pain is a central nervous system
disorder when there is a “neurologic deficit.” The authors do not define what a “neurologic deficit” is in the context of
this quote. The most current research on chronic pain indicates that there are altered neuro-chemical reactions
occurring in the dorsal spine and pain centers in the brain that do not shut off, causing continuing firing of nerve
cells that cause a perception of pain.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Generally speaking, neurologists are the most qualified medical specialist to evaluate organic brain
disorders while neuro-psychologists are most qualified to evaluate cognitive deficits such as judgment,
memory, and information processing problems. The problem is that the DWC Medical Unit eliminated
neuropsychologists from their list of Qualified Medical Examiners because the American Psychological
Association does not consider neuropsychologists a separate field of medicine. Legislative attempts to
correct this in California have not been successful. In stroke cases, this raises a significant problem: Do you
use medical-legal evaluators in neurology or internal medicine? Do you use a neuropsychologist or a
general psychologist? All of these decisions are strategic ones. This author believes the best practice in
stroke cases is to use medical-legal evaluators in internal medicine, neurology, and neuropsychology. These
three specialties will cover the causation of injury and causation of disability multifactorial analysis in these
complex cases.
TABLE 13-2
For Step 1 in any central nervous system case, you need to refer to the text on page 309 to first assess any
impairment of consciousness or awareness in Section 13.3. This ranges from “episodes of altered awareness to
Page 7 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
being in a persistent vegetative state or an unresponsive coma.” Ratings under Table 13-2 are intended specifically
for epilepsy, strokes, Parkinson’s Disease, orthostatic hypotension (standing up, sudden drop in blood pressure,
and fainting), and encephalopathy (usually from brain trauma or failing kidney function).
TABLE 13-3
In contrast, Table 13-3 covers episodic loss of consciousness or awareness that are persistent and permanent.
Syncope (fainting), loss of awareness, seizure disorders, and arousal and sleep disorders are included for this
Table. The term paroxysmal means that the event, e.g., seizure, is sudden or unexpected. There has to be more
than one occurrence for the condition to be ratable.
Page 311 states that conditions “originate from a problem in the nervous system. For similar manifestations that
originate in other body systems (e.g. cardiovascular, respiratory) and secondarily affect the nervous system, see
the chapter(s) for the originating body systems.” The instructions for use of Table 13-3 require the following criteria
and tests:
• Is the injured worker MMI?
• Patterns of occurrence
• Effect of condition on ADLs
• Effects of appropriate treatment
• Severity determined by ECG, EEG testing
• “Describe episodic disorders according to their onset, duration and effect on ADLs.”
• “Daytime loss of consciousness with tonic or clonic seizures, nocturnal episodes with daytime residua, or brief
lapses of awareness/consciousness from minor seizures may interfere significantly with ADLs.” See Page
311.
• “Impairment ratings for major or minor seizures are calculated on the basis of how they affect the ability to
perform ADLs.”
• “The same criteria apply to impairments related to transient loss of awareness or consciousness (syncope,
dizziness) after a period of cerebral ischemia that may be due to various mechanisms …” See Page 311.
• If central nervous system has consciousness and awareness disorder from a cardiopulmonary problem, you
rate them separately.
There is an example in the AMA Guides (example 13-5) on pages 311–312, which is a 4% WPI for “episodic
dizziness and light-headedness” without any actual diagnosis. The DEU raters use this example and Table 13-3 to
rate headaches with a 3% WPI. This Table is also used for orthostatic hypotension.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Most physicians do not know that the DEU raters will rate headaches with a 3% WPI rating utilizing Table
13-3 if headaches are documented by a physician as being industrially related.
Counsel should be aware that there are many different kinds of seizures that are adult onset and many different
causes of them. Included are acute ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke, including subdural and subarachnoid
hemorrhages, brain trauma, hypoxia (loss of oxygen to the brain), abscess, meningitis or encephalitis infections,
and prior infestation such as cysticercosis. Metabolic derangements that can cause seizures include alcohol and
drug withdrawal. There are systemic causes of seizures, including uremia, hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, and drug
intoxication. Focal lesions in the brain can cause seizures as well, such as a primary or metastatic tumor. The gold
standard is a brain MRI with and without contrast. A focal location of an infarct can become general in terms of the
Page 8 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
expression of the symptoms of a seizure, so MRI imaging is the most accurate way to determine the type of seizure
involved in a case, along with the clinical presentation of pre-seizure symptoms, if any, such as an aura. Vision loss
in one or both eyes during a seizure implies an infarct in the occipital area of the brain where the optic nerves travel
to and from the eyes.
A pre-seizure history of uncontrolled hypertension is a strong indication that a seizure or stroke is linked to the
hypertension and is probably caused by an ischemic infarct (narrowing of an artery or vein due to a blood clot) or
hemorrhagic, which is an open bleed from a blood vessel into the brain parenchyma.
TABLE 13-4
Section 13.3c introduces us to one of the most controversial text and Tables in the AMA Guides—sleep disorders.
So here is what the authors actually have to say about sleep disorders:
– Disorders related to initiating and maintaining sleep, or
– Inability to sleep, or
– Excessive somnolence, or
– Sleep induced respiratory impairment, or
– Sleep-wake schedules
Impairment categories that may arise from sleep disorders relate to:
– Nervous system with reduced daytime attention, concentration and cognitive function
– Mental and behavioral factors—depression, irritability, interpersonal difficulties, and social problems
– Cardiovascular system (CHD, CHF, enlarged heart or arrhythmias)
– The hematopoietic system
– See Chapter 5 for obstructive sleep apnea
The impairment categories are:
– Central sleep apnea
– Narcolepsy
– Idiopathic hypersomnia (too much sleep, unknown cause)
– Restless leg syndrome
– Depression
– Neuromuscular disorders with sleep apnea
– Post traumatic hypersomnia (too much sleep)
The most confusing and controversial instructions on arousal and sleep disorders are found on page 317. In the
text, the authors indicate that: “It is expected that the diagnosis of excessive daytime sleepiness has been
supported by formal studies in a sleep laboratory.” But then the authors go on to describe the Epworth Sleepiness
Scale that is widely used in our cases by physicians of different specialties. The authors then indicate that the
Epworth Sleepiness Scale is just as valid as a Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MLST) that is performed in a
laboratory.
The actual quote is: “This scale (referring to the Epworth) correlates with the multiple sleep latency test (MLST),
which supports pathologic sleep in narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia.”
Physicians are regularly ignoring this language that simply says that the Epworth Sleepiness Scale has the same
results as a laboratory based MLST only for narcolepsy (falling asleep during activities) and idiopathic hypersomnia
Page 9 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
(too much sleep for unknown causes). The Epworth Scale is not a substitution for a polysomnogram or other
laboratory sleep studies for diagnoses other than narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia.
So, do you need a sleep study or not? So far, there is no case law. Day time alertness does affect work
performance, but a physician must determine what is causing it and is the sleep disorder permanent? Sleep
disorders are listed in the DSM-IV and are considered a psychiatric disorder. The DSM-IV instructions also require
polysomnogram studies and other sleep studies in a sleep laboratory. When counsel is confronted with a claim of a
sleep disorder, the most important question besides the diagnosis is the applicant’s pre-injury sleep profile? A
person’s sleep profile is his or her sleeping habits prior to the industrial injury or exposure. This would include
whether there was a history of sleep apnea, enlarged prostate that caused frequent nocturnal urination, a snoring
spouse, pets who need to be attended to during the night on a regular basis, etc.
Sleep and arousal disorders are rated from Table 13-4. A Class 2 is 10%–29% WPI “Reduced daytime alertness;
interferes with ability to perform some ADLs.” See page 317 AMA Guides.
Sleep studies are problematic—they are not completely valid and have idiosyncratic results, but evidence based
medicine probably requires one. A valid sleep study will show restorative sleep—deep delta wave and adequate
REM time. Generally, a person who wakes up once an hour is not getting adequate sleep and is visible in a
person’s countenance.
Table 13-4 is intended by the authors of the AMA Guides to be used in conjunction with determining the highest
WPI rating for cerebral impairments and using the highest rating of the possible four components from Tables 13-2,
13-3, 13-4, and 13-6, plus consideration for behavioral and cognitive deficits from Table 13-8 (Steps 1–4 above).
Many physicians are using Table 13-4 as a stand-alone WPI rating source, and published case law has not yet
evolved in the last 14 years to determine whether this method is consistent with the instructions in the AMA Guides
or is permissible based on case law that mandates an accurate WPI rating.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Remember, sleep is an activity of daily living considered as part of Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA Guides.
If an injured worker has sleep disturbance as a result of pain from an injury then arguably up to 3% WPI for
pain related impairment that affects ADL like sleep is appropriate without a full-blown evaluation under Table
13-4. Perhaps Table 13-4 is only for sleep disorders caused by heart attacks, stroke, direct brain injuries—in
other words, only sleep disorders that are caused directly from brain injury.
TABLES 13-5 and 13-6
Step 2 in any brain related case requires assessment of the injured worker’s mental status and integrative
functioning. Table 13-5 is the Clinical Dementia Rating (the “CDR”), which is used to determine WPI ratings based
on mental status in Table 13-6.
The CDR is an evaluation tool to determine the effects of any organic brain syndrome. The CDR evaluates
orientation, attention, short-term memory, calculations, abstraction, construction, information, and recall. The
authors state on page 319:
It is the person with subtle cognitive changes who benefits from neuropsychological testing. Neurological
disorders that have different behavioral ramifications amenable to neuropsychological evaluation include
traumatic brain injury, dementia, Parkinson’s disease, human immunodeficiency virus, encephalopathy,
multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, neurotoxic exposure, chronic pain, and personality assessment in individuals with
neurologic disease.
Page 10 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
They go on to say: “The criteria for evaluating mental status and cognitive impairment are based on the amount of
interference with the ability to perform ADLs. A tool that combines both cognitive skills and function is the Clinical
Dementia Rating (CDR).” See page 319.
You must make sure the evaluating physician closely follows the instructions on how to calculate the CDR score
[AMA Guides, p. 319]:
To use the CDR, score the individual’s cognitive function for each category independently. The maximum CDR
score is 3. Memory is considered the primary category; the other categories are secondary. If at least three
secondary categories are given the same numeric score as memory, then CDR = M.
If three or more secondary categories are given a score greater or less than the memory score then, CDR =
the score of the majority of secondary categories unless three secondary categories are scored on one side of
M and two secondary categories are scored on the other side of M. In this case, CDR = M. Corresponding
impairment ratings for CDR scores are listed in Table 13-6.
Notice that within Table 13-5, the CDR, under the category “Community Affairs,” there is a reference to work
functioning: “independent function at usual level in job, shopping, volunteer and social groups.” The subsequent
CDR ratings refer to these functions in this category. So this is one of the few places in the AMA Guides that
actually rate work function impairment from a cognitive standpoint.
Tables 13-5 and 13-6 are excellent frameworks for assessing impairment relating to mental status for memory,
orientation, judgment and problem solving; community affairs, home and hobbies; and personal care. Remember,
these tests do not just cover dementia—they cover any kind of deficits that fall under these categories as a result of
a head or brain injury and may apply even in chronic pain cases.
TABLE 13-7
Step 3 of determining the most severe cerebral impairment due to a brain injury requires assessment of language
skills and Section 13.3e, Table 13-7 on page 323 covers Impairments Due to Aphasia or Dysphasia. Aphasia
means loss or impairment of the power to use or comprehend words usually resulting from brain damage. Aphasia
usually is detected when a person with brain damage uses the wrong words either in conversation or during reading
aloud. The authors of the AMA Guides define aphasia as: “[L]anguage function is defective or absent. It includes a
lack of comprehension with deficits in vision, hearing and language (both spoken and written), and also the inability
to implement and discernible and appropriate language symbols by voice, action, writing, or pantomime.” See AMA
Guides, Page 322.
Dysphasia means loss of or deficiency in the power to use or understand language as a result of injury to or
disease of the brain. Dysphasia usually occurs when a person with brain damage can think of the right words but
cannot say them. Dysphasia “is a language impairment that is less severe than aphasia (which literally means ‘no
speech’), but still is associated with a lesion in the dominant parietal lobe.” See page 322. Dysphasia includes word
finding difficulties, word substitution, problems with processing or expressing speech, or both. “An inability to
understand language has a poorer prognosis than an inability to express language.” See page 322.
TABLE 13-8
Step 4 of the five steps of determining cerebral impairment includes Section 13.3f, which requires assessment of
emotional or behavioral impairments. Arguably, Table 13-8 should only be used in conjunction with a central
nervous system disorder, such as a stroke, TBI, or other organic brain injury. However, as described below,
physicians are using the WPI ratings in Table 13-8 for stand-alone psychiatric cases in order to rebut a GAF score
under the strict WPI rating method required from pages 1-12 through 1-16 of the 2005 PDRS.
But here is what the authors of the AMA Guides say about the use of Table 13-8 [AMA Guides, p. 325]:
Page 11 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
Emotional disturbances originating in verifiable neurologic impairments (e.g. stroke, head injury) are assessed
using the criteria in this chapter. Psychiatric features may also exist with primary neurologic disorders.
Neurologic impairments producing psychiatric conditions are assessed using the neurologic examination, with
an expanded neuropsychiatric history and the necessary ancillary tests. Psychiatric impairments may include
depression, manic states, emotional fluctuations, socially unacceptable behavior, involuntary laughing or
crying, impulsivity, general disinhibition … and other kinds of CNS responses.
The authors then identify some examples where Table 13-8 would apply: from right or left hemisphere infarcts; or
right or left sided seizure disorders. They recommend the use of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory in order to provide
some guidance on determining a WPI rating. However, there are many psychiatrists who would disagree with the
use of this test to determine behavioral impairment.
Table 13-8 on page 325 is being used as a stand-alone table for determination of psychiatric impairment as an
alternative rating method to using the GAF score as mandated by the 2005 PDRS. Physicians are rating work
function impairments using the criteria listed on page 365 of the AMA Guides along with Table 14-1 on page 363
and with ADL functioning under Table 1-2 on page 4 and then using the data from those sources to apply under
Table 13-8 to obtain the WPI psychiatric rating. While some judges have allowed this method of rating psychiatric
impairment as a rebuttal to a strict rating using the GAF score as required by the 2005 PDRS, there is no published
appellate decision that allows or disallows this method. There is language in the text on page 325 that can be
interpreted to allow use of Table 13-8 in cases where there is not a central nervous system disorder that is caused
by organic cerebral brain damage [AMA Guides, p. 325]:
Psychiatric manifestations and impairments that do not have documented neurologic impairments are
evaluated using the criteria in the chapter on mental and behavioral impairments (See Table 13-8 and Chapter
14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders).
This is probably the most important quote in the book for physicians to cite in pure psychiatric cases to justify using
Table 13-8 as a stand-alone rating in order to rebut a GAF/WPI rating that was based on the 2005 PDRS. This is
because the text itself refers to Table 13-8 and Chapter 14 of the Guides to establish a WPI rating for psychiatric
cases that are not from brain damage due to an underlying neurological disorder.
The evaluating or treating physician must explain how and why this method of rating is more accurate and reliable
than using the GAF score to obtain the WPI rating under the strict use of the 2005 PDRS. Some physicians have
already testified that there is no scientific evidence that a given GAF score corresponds with any given WPI
impairment rating since the 2005 PDRS that adopted that method does not explain the scientific basis or rationale
for the adoption of this method. In fact, some psychiatrists have indicated that the GAF scoring procedures
described in the 2005 PDRS do not account sufficiently for occupational deficits. They are advocating the use of
Table 14-1, Table 1-2 and the work function criteria on page 365 to account for psychiatric symptom severity,
personal, social and occupational functioning deficits in a more accurate and reliable fashion than just using the
GAF score to WPI rating system mandated by the 2005 PDRS.
See Chapter 2 of this guidebook on proper rating of psychiatric impairments. However, many physicians take the
position that this method and use of Table 13-8 should only be used when there are organic brain injuries and not
when there is only a stand-alone psychiatric problem such as depression in the absence of injury to the head or
brain.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Table 13-8 is probably the most underutilized table in the AMA Guides. Counsel should be aware of its use
in psychiatric cases since the GAF score is now obsolete according to the preamble to the DSM 5. See the
discussion about psychiatric injuries in Chapter 9 of this guidebook.
Page 12 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
STEP 5
One of the most important instructions in Chapter 13 appears on page 327 of the AMA Guides to remind us that
Tables 13-1 through 13-8 were to be used only to determine cerebral impairments and not to be used separately,
except for Table 13-8 under Step 4. As to Step 5, the authors state on page 327 of the AMA Guides:
The remainder of this chapter covers the impairments listed in Table 13-1. The following impairments are
combined with the most severe category of cerebral impairment described previously. If no cerebral impairment
exists, the following impairments can stand alone or be combined with each other (using the CVC).
This reminds us to use Tables 13-2, 13-3, 13-4, 13-6, 13-7, and 13-8 for cerebral impairments only unless a judge
allows a variation from these instructions in light of current case law that allows in some cases for a physician to
utilize any chapter, table, or method that is within the AMA Guides 5th Edition. See Chapter 8 for a discussion on
rebutting a standard permanent disability rating.
STAND-ALONE TABLES
TABLES 13-9, 13-10, 13-11, 13-12, 13-13, and 13-14
Section 13.4 includes criteria for rating impairments of the cranial nerves that are divided into the 12 separate
nerves for 12 separate functions. These tables are used when there is documented nerve damage to these specific
nerves that can be caused by trauma or disease.
Tables 13-9 and 13-10 are impairment ratings caused by damage to the Cranial Nerve II, the optic nerve, resulting
in loss of visual acuity and/or visual field, respectively. The authors cross reference you to The Visual System,
Chapter 12 of the AMA Guides, Tables 12-4 and 12-7, respectively. You only use Tables 13-9 and 13-10 if there is
damage to the optic nerve only. There is a great example of optic neuritis on pages 328–329. There actually was a
case of optic neuritis in California where the injured worker claimed exposure to solvents caused his optic neuritis.
The case was settled before any definitive medical determination for causation could be made, but the impairment
was significant—almost total loss of vision in one eye due to damage to the optic nerve.
Damage to Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI involve the oculomotor, troclear, and abducens nerves. Example 13-33 on
page 330 is a great example of a diabetic neuropathy that causes diplopia (double vision) with a WPI rating of up to
25%. It is important to note that double vision and strabismus (lazy eye) are rated here and not in Chapter 12, The
Visual System.
The Cranial Nerve V is the trigeminal nerve, which is a very important nerve in the face, and we see many cases
where the trigeminal nerve may be involved. The trigeminal nerve is responsible for sensory for the face, scalp,
nasal and oral cavities, tongue, and chewing. The authors state on page 331:
Bilateral facial sensation loss is uncommon. Combine the impairment percentage for sensation loss that
involves the trigeminal nerve with the estimated impairment percentage for pain or motor loss.
Motor impairment of the trigeminal nerve may affect chewing, swallowing and speech articulation and may be
accompanied by pain or a tic.
There is a major typographical error on page 331—“Speech, chewing and swallowing impairments are considered
in Chapter 9 [sic], Ear Nose, Throat and Related Structures.”
Actually, it’s Chapter 11! Chapter 9 is the Hemapoietoic System.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Bell’s Palsy can be lit up or aggravated by industrial exposure, especially severe emotional stress. Counsel
should use Table 13-11 for a rating; most physicians do not know the details of this table, or its applicability
Page 13 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
to trigeminal nerve disorders that we occasionally see in our cases.
Table 13-11 covers Cranial Nerve V, the Trigeminal Nerve and specifically rates “facial neuralgic pain” that may or
does interfere with ADL functioning.
Table 13-12 covers Cranial Nerve VII, the Facial Nerve that controls taste at the front of the tongue, eyelid closure,
chewing, swallowing, and facial expression.
Table 13-13 covers Cranial Nerve VIII, the Vestibulocochlear Nerve that has two branches—one for hearing and the
other for balance, vertigo, position, and orientation in space. Tinnitus is also listed here, directly quoted from
Chapter 11: “Vertigo is the most disturbing symptom of vestibular dysfunction and is seldom, if ever, minor.” AMA
Guides, page 333. They refer you to both Table 13-13 and Chapter 11 for vertigo. See Table 11-4 on page 253.
Table 13-14 covers Cranial Nerves IX (Glossopharyngeal Nerve), X (Vagus Nerve), and XII (Hypoglossal Nerve).
These nerves control swallowing, speaking, and visceral functioning. A Class 1 impairment is “Mild dysarthria,
dystonia, or dysphasia with choking on liquids or semi solid foods.” Doesn’t this sound like symptoms from GERD?
However, most of the Cranial Nerve impairment ratings are intended for a central nervous system neurological
organic brain injury. Examples 13-37 and 13-38 on page 335 include Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS—Lou
Gerhig’s Disease) and a non-dominant side hemiplegia stroke. Both examples use Table 13-14 to show severe
swallowing and speaking deficits due to neurologic deficits of Cranial Nerves IX, X, and XII, which would be
combined with other neurological deficits.
Table 13-15 on page 336 is the Station and Gait Disorders table that is being widely used by physicians in cases
that involve problems with weight bearing functioning due to lumbar spinal, leg or knee injuries. Some physicians
follow the strict instructions for use of this table and require that there must be some documented central nervous
system or peripheral nervous system injury that justifies its use. Someone with a bad back certainly can easily fit
into a Class 2, 10% to 19% WPI rating if the person “Rises to standing position, walks some distance with difficulty
and without assistance, but is limited to level surfaces.” A Class 3 is 20% to 39% WPI rating for someone who
“Rises and maintains standing position with difficulty, cannot walk without assistance.” The confusion with this table
is that the authors do not define the word “assistance”—does it mean use of a cane, walker or wheelchair or does it
mean that a person has to assist the patient ambulating? The authors state on page 336:
Problems maintaining balance and a stable gait can develop from a CNS or peripheral neurologic impairment.
Peripheral neuropathy, identified by examination and electro-diagnostic tests, is frequently associated with
complaints of imbalance or stumbling, since information from sensory receptors is altered.
Impairment ratings for station and gait disorders are determined according to the effect on ambulation. Other
anatomic or functional changes from other body systems, such as the musculoskeletal system, are combined
with the neurologic assessment for station and gait.
Table 13-15 has to be read in conjunction with Section 13.8 “Criteria for Rating Impairments Related To Chronic
Pain” on page 343. The instructions on that page indicate that: “If a lower extremity needs to be rated for causalgia,
posttraumatic neuralgia, or RSD, use the station and gait impairment criteria given in Table 13-15.” This table was
used in a case wherein the Applicant, a certified nurse’s assistant, sustained an admitted specific injury to her
lumbar spine while moving a very heavy patient and after unsuccessful treatment, she had to ambulate with the use
of a walker. In fact, she needed assistance to rise from a sitting position to a standing position and used her
walker’s frame to pull herself out of a chair. The orthopedic AME indicated during his deposition that he was not
familiar with Table 13-15—that he only learned the orthopedic chapters of the AMA Guides, Chapters 15, 16, and
17.
This case is an object lesion for all attorneys—do not assume all AME and PQME physicians have read all chapters
of the AMA Guides. In this example, the language from page 336 quoted above was read to the AME during his
deposition. He assigned the appropriate WPI rating using the Range of Motion method in Chapter 15 for the
Page 14 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
Applicant’s lumbar spinal musculoskeletal impairment and then opined that under Table 13-15, her WPI rating is a
Class 4, 55% WPI because she has to use a walker for ambulation and she needs assistance (the walker or a
person) to assist her from a sitting position to a standing position. The cause of the severe station and gait
impairment was a compromise of the Applicant’s spinal cord from inflammation from a severely herniated disc that
blasted into the spinal canal. The AME in this case has been an AME in orthopedic surgery for over 35 years! The
moral of this case is to make sure that evaluating and treating physicians become familiar with other chapters,
tables, and methods in the AMA Guides and counsel may become the teacher of those items.
COMMON MISTAKE:
The impairment ratings in Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides emphasize loss of function as opposed to
anatomic or diagnosis based impairments. In contrast, the orthopedic chapters, 15, 16, and 17 emphasize
either anatomic or diagnosis based impairments. There is a treasure trove of impairments in Chapter 13 that
can be used in orthopedic cases like the example above and even in simpler orthopedic cases. The key
here is to make sure physicians know about the impairment ratings in Chapter 13 and that they can be used
as alternative ratings if the physician concludes that the strict ratings from the orthopedic chapters are not
accurate in a given case.
The Romberg test means a person falls over when their eyes are closed—which is evidence of a peripheral nerve
disorder.
Section 13.5b, along with Tables 13-15, 13-16, and 13-17, cover movement disorders that are probably as a result
of a central nervous system condition. Examples of movement disorders that are mentioned in the text include
conditions that: affect an upper extremity, lower extremity or both; result from cerebral dysfunction, mild tics,
tremors, dystonia, or loss of dexterity.
Use Tables 13-15, 13-16, and 13-17: “For movement disorders affecting the lower extremities, use the station and
gait section.” AMA Guides, page 337. These tables are the only place in the Guides that refer to dominant upper
extremity. Virtually all of the tables in the Upper Extremity chapter, Chapter 16 do not distinguish upper extremity
dominance to determine a WPI rating.
“Tables 13-15, 13-16, and 13-17 are used to rate upper extremity dysfunction from any lesion in the brain. Use
these tables for rating upper extremity dysfunction manifested by weakness, tremor, or pain, that affects ADL.” AMA
Guides, page 338. The authors imply that these three tables can only be used for a central nervous system
disorder: “The upper extremity impairment may result from, but is not limited to, TBI, stroke, neurodegenerative
diseases (e.g. Parkinson’s disease, MS, sequelae of CNS infection.)” AMA Guides, page 338.
In reference to when upper extremity function is affected by a spinal cord injury, the authors state at page 338:
When the spinal cord disorder affects both upper extremities, the individual’s impairment is greater than
indicated by a simple combination of impairments of the dominant and nondominant extremities. For these
cases, Chapter 15, which covers neurologic impairment from spinal cord disorders and other sections in this
chapter should be used.
The impairment ratings given in Tables 13-16 and 13-17 are determined from neurologic examination of motor
strength, coordination, and dexterity. Functional activities, such as buttoning a shirt, lacing shoes, writing, and
performing a pegboard task can assess abilities needed for daily activities.
What counsel needs to be aware of in using Table 13-16 or 13-17 is that the key to our use in workers’
compensation cases is the loss of dexterity. These tables are the only ones in the AMA Guides that refer to reduced
dexterity, which is the most common complaint of any person who has carpal tunnel syndrome. This is true in many
cases before and after carpal tunnel surgical release of the carpal ligament. The complaints of dropping things,
weakness, and limitations with fine motor functions, such as writing or typing, all relate to problems with dexterity.
Page 15 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
This is why many physicians use Tables 13-16 and 13-17 in carpal tunnel cases because these tables provide a
clear description of functional loss, while the instructions on page 495 regarding rating carpal tunnel syndrome in
Chapter 16 do not.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Very few hand specialists, including orthopedic surgeons or plastic surgeons with a fellowship in hand
surgery, are familiar with Tables 13-16 and 13-17. Table 13-16 is underutilized in carpal tunnel syndrome
cases even though the functional loss described in that table fits squarely with many patients who had carpal
tunnel syndrome or who have a less than stellar result from carpal tunnel release surgery. Also, keep in
mind many cases involve not only carpal tunnel syndrome but also De Quervain’s tenosynovitis, trigger
finger, and Guyon’s canal (compression of the ulnar nerve at the wrist/palm area) at the same time. Loss of
dexterity is the hallmark of people who have multiple diagnosis in the same hand. See also Table 13-22.
Table 13-16 can be used in a condition called industrial focal dystonia, which is a central nervous system disorder
whose etiology is unknown. Patients develop cramping and involuntary stiffness of fingers (usually the index and
middle) where, during an episode, they lose all dexterity of those fingers. The condition is known in layman terms as
writer’s cramp. In one case handled by this author, a 60-year-old typist developed the insidious onset of these
symptoms, and an AME in neurology opined that the condition was industrially related due to her prolonged typing
activities over her lifetime. He also opined that even though the underlying etiology of the condition is unknown, her
work activities brought on the symptoms, complaints, and impairment of function resulting in a Class 2, 24% WPI
rating with a 15% apportionment due to non-industrial factors. His rationale for the apportionment was that dystonia
is a central nervous system disorder, and we really do not know how her brain developed the condition, but that the
work activities caused the condition to manifest itself.
Table 13-16 on page 338 and Table 13-22 on page 343 are identical! Table 13-16 is labeled “Impairment of One
Upper Extremity,” which is under section 13.6 Criteria for Rating Impairments of Upper Extremities Related to
Central Impairment. This means Table 13-16 is intended for brain injury cases. But then Table 13-22 is titled
“Impairment Related to Chronic Pain in One Upper Extremity.” It is probable that the authors here thought that since
chronic pain is a central nervous system phenomenon, why not assign the same ratings as for someone who has
organic brain injury resulting in impairment of one upper extremity?
A note about Tables 13-16 through 13-21:
Section 13.7 lists the criteria for rating spinal cord and related disorders and will look familiar to you. On page 340,
the authors of the AMA Guides state:
Impairments resulting from spinal cord injuries and other adverse conditions include those relating to station
and gait, use of the upper extremities, respiration, urinary bladder function, anorectal function, sexual function
and pain.
What they don’t tell you here is that these tables are the same ones for the cortico-spinal tract impairments in
Chapter 15! Tables 13-16 through Table 13-21 are exactly the same tables as Tables 15-6(a.) through 15-6(g.)
found on pages 396 and 397.
In any event, when you have a serious case that involves AMA Guides Chapter 13, you must also compare the
ratings you obtain here with any rating you obtain in other chapters of the AMA Guides, including those in AMA
Guides Chapter 15 on corticospinal tract impairments, Table 15-6 on pages 396 and 397.
TABLE 13-22
AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Section 13.8, pages 343–344, covers impairments caused by chronic pain that includes
causalgia (nerve damage), posttraumatic neuralgia, and reflex sympathetic dysthrophy (RSD). The authors of
Page 16 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
Chapter 13 do not use the term “complex regional pain syndrome type I and type II” because “it does not represent
a single diagnostic criterion.” Table 13-22 on page 343 is the Criteria for Rating Impairment Related to Chronic Pain
in One Upper Extremity. The authors of the AMA Guides tell us that if the chronic pain affects a lower extremity, you
use the station and gait impairment criteria given in Table 13-15 on page 336. Example 13-45 on page 344 is
interesting for the fact that the case involves a post carpal tunnel surgery that resulted in RSD with a 40% WPI
rating, and the authors warn that this rating does not include any psychiatric sequelae.
Here is what the authors of the AMA Guides say about chronic pain syndromes on page 343:
Impairment due primarily to intractable pain may greatly influence an individual’s ability to function ….
Psychological factors can influence the degree and perception of pain: different individuals in similar
circumstances may be impaired by pain to different degrees …. Chronic pain in this section covers the
diagnoses of causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and reflex sympathetic dystrophy.
To rate these conditions for impairment, diagnosis is key and is based on clinical criteria.
This language is interesting because the instructions for diagnosis and WPI ratings in Table 16-16 for causalgia and
RSD for an upper extremity are based solely on research diagnostic criteria only. The most recent edition of the
AMA Guides, the 6th Edition, uses the clinical diagnostic criteria for RSD and causalgia. The International
Association for the Study of Pain in 2006 changed the entire diagnostic criteria for these disorders, which changes
have been accepted worldwide. In the Fifth Edition, the authors define “causalgia” and “RSD” using obsolete
definitions, and the authors do not define “posttraumatic neuralgia.”
The most important quote for medical-legal purposes in our cases under the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides is on
page 343:
To rate an impairment for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and RSD in an upper extremity, use Table 13-22.
If a lower extremity needs to be rated for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, or RSD, use the station and gait
impairment criteria given in Table 13-15.
This language is used every day in Almaraz-Guzman II and Guzman III cases. See Chapter 7 of this guidebook on
rebutting a permanent disability rating.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many physicians will not rate complex regional pain syndrome correctly—they only rate using Tables 16-10,
16-11, and 16-15 for upper extremities and Table 13-22 for lower extremities. If you have a complex regional
pain syndrome case, make sure you choose the correct medical specialty for AME and PQME selection.
Only a few physicians who actually specialize in CRPS cases are qualified to examine and write medical-
legal reports in these cases. You must make sure the evaluating physician is using the current clinical
definition of CRPS and its current diagnostic criteria. It is a huge mistake if a physician uses any of the
descriptions of the diagnosis of CRPS in the AMA Guides because all of them are obsolete.
AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Section 13.9, pages 344–351, covers impairments of the peripheral nervous system,
neuromuscular junction, and muscular system. These involve disorders of the spinal nerve roots, brachial plexus,
and individual nerves that control sensory and motor functions, and which disorders are permanent. This section of
Chapter 13 requires that any pain related impairments be caused by verifiable permanent nerve damage, and the
pain related impairments based on subjective complaints only and referred to in Chapter 18 do not apply in these
cases.
Tables 13-23 and 13-24
Page 17 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
Section 13.9 covers criteria for rating impairments of the peripheral nervous system, neuromuscular junction, and
muscular system. On page 344 of the AMA Guides, the authors refer to conditions that cause “loss of function due
to sensory deficits, pain, or discomfort; loss of muscular strength and control of specific muscles or groups of
muscles; or alteration of autonomic nervous system (ANS) control.” The entire section seems to be a repeat of the
analysis of sensory, pain, and motor impairment described in Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities, but from a strictly
neurologic standpoint. The criteria for these tables require specific damage to specific peripheral nerves for the
rating methods to apply. On page 344, they state:
Neurologic evaluation of pain is based first on the individual’s description of the character, location, intensity,
duration, and persistence of the discomfort and on verification of the anatomic distribution of the neurologic
defect.
The authors refer to nerve distributions described in Chapters 15 and 16, but don’t make specific references to
which tables and charts. However, you are referred to Tables 16-12a and Table 16-12b and Figure 16-47, which all
provide listings of specific peripheral nerves, their function, and upper extremity distribution.
AMA Guides, Table 13-24, on page 348, covers impairments to muscle function and muscle strength from
peripheral nerve disorders. Example 13-46 on page 348 is interesting for the fact that this table and method were
used to rate diabetic neuropathy of the peroneal nerve when the diabetic patient has persistent and painful
numbness of the right lower extremity. The rating in the example is for both sensory and motor function impairments
due to the nerve damage that was caused by the diabetes.
Table 13-4 on page 317 has the four classes of sleep disorder WPI ratings that are based upon sleep studies. If
there is any emotional disturbances caused by a neurologic impairment, use Table 13-8 on page 325 and not the
psyche criteria in AMA Guides Chapter 14. The analysis should be based upon neuro-diagnostic studies, such as
the Neuropsychiatric Inventory. Table 13-8 has the criteria for rating impairments due to emotional or behavioral
disorders with four classes up to 90% WPI. These ratings are used if the underlying cause is a brain disorder, such
as a stroke, head injury, seizure disorder, or spinal cord injury.
Table 13-23, page 346, which is one of the most important tables in the entire AMA Guides, refers to six classes of
sensory impairments due to pain or sensory deficits resulting from peripheral nerve disorders. Table 13-23 refers to
tables in AMA Guides Chapters 15 (the spine), 16, (upper extremities) and 17 (lower extremities) for loss of function
of nerve roots. Again, remember, use of Table 13-23 and the instructions in Section 13.9a, pages 345–346 (spinal
nerve roots), 13.9b, pages 346–347 (brachial plexus) and 13.9c, page 347 (peripheral nerve impairments) require
verifiable nerve damage. Follow the math in the footnotes for Tables 13-23 and 13-24 (pages 348–349),
respectively.
Here is what the authors say about peripheral nerve damage, sensory or motor deficits and pain:
They refer to the grading procedures for single digital nerves of the hand that are in Chapter 16, specifically Table
16-10, for sensory deficits or pain. Table 16-11 for motor deficits and Table 16-15 for the maximum upper extremity
value for each sensory or motor function for each peripheral nerve in the upper extremities. You are also referred to
the same type of sensory and motor charts for the peripheral nerves for the lower extremity in Tables 15-15, 15-16,
15-17, and 15-18 [AMA Guides, p. 345]:
Symptoms of sensory deficits and pain in peripheral nerves … include anesthesia, hyperthesia, dysthesia,
paresthesia, hyperesthesia, cold intolerance and an intense burning pain.
These instructions are not in Chapters 15, 16, or 17!
If the problem involves a peripheral neuromuscular system, use Tables 13-23 and 13-24. The physician compares
the injured side to uninjured side in terms of muscle strength and movement. Then they state on page 345:
Sensory dysfunction associated with peripheral nerve disorders is evaluated according to the following criteria:
1. How does the pain or sensory deficit interfere with ADL?
Page 18 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
2. To what extent does the pain or sensory deficit follow the defined anatomic pathways of the nerve root,
plexus or peripheral nerve?
3. To what extent does the description of the pain or sensory deficit indicate that it is caused by a peripheral
nerve abnormality?
4. To what extent does the pain or sensory deficit correspond to other disturbances of the involved nerve
structure?
Only persistent pain or discomfort that leads to permanent loss of function, in spite of maximum effort toward
medical rehabilitation and allowing an optimal period of time for physiologic adjustment, should be evaluated as
a permanent impairment. Pain that does not meet more than one of the above criteria is not considered to be
within the scope of this section. (emphasis in original)
This language in the last paragraph quoted above is in italics in the AMA Guides to emphasize permanency of the
condition. The authors then distinguish pain as an add-on of 3% WPI from Chapter 18:
Pain is defined in Chapter 18 as “an unpleasant experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage
or described in terms of such damage.” Pain is a subjective symptom and is difficult to evaluate but its
presence, anatomic background, and intensity may be verified with a thorough examination. Chronic paid for
causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia and RSD is evaluated in Table 13-22.
But they go on to say that in order to rate sensory dysfunction, it must be permanent, and physicians must use the
criteria for rating spinal nerves, brachial plexus, and individual nerves.
Grading procedures for sensory and/or motor impairments in all peripheral nerves (except sensory loss in the
digits (Table 16-10)) is found in Tables 13-23 and 13-24. The maximum impairment for spinal roots, brachial
plexus and individual nerves is noted under the respective sections below.
Here are the instructions for use of Tables 13-23 and 13-24 that any physician must follow. It is probably easier if
the physician uses the criteria in Chapters 15 and 16 to perform lower extremity or upper extremity peripheral
nervous system WPI ratings due to spinal nerve root damage. We are also including rating instructions on how to
rate nerve injuries involving spinal nerve roots, brachial plexus, and peripheral nerves:
Spinal Nerve Roots:
1. Follow the instructions for sensory and motor deficits at the bottom of Tables 13-23 (sensory) and 13-24
(motor).
2. Table 16-13 provides maximum upper extremity impairment due to unilateral sensory or motor deficits of
nerve roots C5 through T1.
3. Once the sensory deficit or pain is estimated according to Table 13-23 and motor deficit according to Table
13-24, multiply these deficits times the maximum sensory and/or motor impairments of the spinal nerve in
question. See Table 15-18.
4. For lower extremities, nerve roots L3 through S1, see Table 15-18 for maximum lower extremity impairment
due to sensory or motor deficits.
5. Use Tables 13-23 and 13-24 and multiply deficit times the maximum values of sensory and motor nerve
impairments.
6. If nerve deficits are bilateral, rate each side separately and then combine.
Brachial Plexus:
1. Use Table 16-14 to see the maximum impairment due to unilateral sensory or motor deficits of the brachial
plexus.
2. Use Table 13-24 to rate the upper extremity using Table 16-15.
Page 19 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
3. See Figure 16-47.
Peripheral Nerves:
1. Use Tables 13-23 and 13-24 with Table 16-15 for upper extremities and Table 17-37 for lower extremities.
The instructions require that physicians use the functional loss tables: Table 13-16 and Table 13-17 for upper
extremity function loss; Table 13-15 for station and gait impairments for Neuromuscular Impairments (e.g.,
myasthenis gravis), and Muscular Impairments (e.g., muscular dystrophy, abnormal potassium metabolism,
inflammatory muscle disease); and Table 13-2 for Autonomic Nervous System Disorders.
What is interesting about this section with Tables 13-23 and 13-24 is that using the language here, but utilizing
Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15, result in higher WPI ratings because a Grade 3 pain range is from 30% to 60%
deficit while ratings under 13-23 and 13-24 are less. Finally, on page 351, the authors state:
Impairments of spinal nerves, roots, plexuses, or peripheral nerves by various diseases or injuries may be
partial or complete, unilateral or bilateral, related to motor or sensory functions, with or without pain. Each of
these attributes or characteristics should be evaluated. When there is bilateral involvement, the two unilateral
impairments should be determined then combined using the CVC.
Be careful of this instruction. The physician will probably follow this instruction, but the PDRS indicates that you rate
each extremity separately, adjust, and then combine. See Chapter 2 of this guidebook on the instructions for
combining permanent disability using the Combined Values Chart.
FURTHER NOTES ON CHAPTER 13
Table 13-16 on page 338 covers the rating whole person impairments of one upper extremity and accounts for hand
dominance (the upper extremity chapter does not). Table 13-17 on page 340 covers whole person impairments for
both upper extremities. Table 13-22 on page 343 covers whole person impairments for chronic pain in one upper
extremity. AMA Guides Chapter 13 differs so much from that of AMA Guides Chapter 16 that it is clear the editors
did not reconcile the two chapters that cover essentially the same impairments when the upper extremity nervous
system is involved.
Many physicians are using AMA Guides Chapter 13 to evaluate chronic pain conditions based upon Chapter 1 of
the AMA Guides, which instruct the physician to use tables, figures, and instructions by analogy if a medical
condition is not listed in the Guides, but which do have a scientific basis. Many physicians are suggesting that a
chronic pain condition, such as failed lumbar syndrome or fibromyalgia, is really a central nervous system condition
since the perception of pain, fatigue, sleep disturbance, persistent flu-like symptoms, and all of their consequences
on a person’s ADL functioning are originating in the brain and are equivalent to a organic brain syndrome of some
kind. While this theory is not necessarily endorsed here, from a medical-legal standpoint, a physician’s conclusions
about Chapter 13 applying to such cases must be supported by substantial evidence in order to provide a basis for
an impairment rating. We are seeing physicians now using the sleep disturbance analysis in AMA Guides Section
13.3c and Table 13-4 on page 317 in such cases, along with other tables in Chapter 13 to justify an impairment
rating in a chronic pain case. Decisional law will develop in determining the nature, scope, and permissive use of
AMA Guides Chapter 13 in these cases when there is no clear cut brain or spinal “damage” in the usual sense of
the term. See the detailed discussion of sleep disorders in Ch. 4, § 4.19, of this guidebook on developing the record
to obtain accurate ratings. Since page 317 refers to the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, the self-report test looks like
this:
Likelihood of Dozing: (0 = never,
1 = slight chance, 2 = moderate
chance, 3 = high chance)
0
1
2
3
Sitting and reading
Watching TV
Sitting in a public place
Page 20 of 20
§ 3.13 AMA Guides Chapter 13: The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
Riding as a passenger for an
hour
Taking an afternoon nap
Sitting and talking to someone
Sitting after a nonalcohol lunch
Stopped in traffic
SCOR
E:
1–6 = Getting enough sleep
7–8 = average score
9 and up = Needs advice of a sleep specialist
As you can see, there will be conflicts in medical evidence as to which chapter of the AMA Guides should be used
in certain cases. For example, in a bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and cubital tunnel syndrome case (affecting
both wrists and elbows), do you use AMA Guides Chapter 16 (upper extremities) or AMA Guides Chapter 13’s
section on peripheral nerve disorders? Arguably, you use both and take the highest WPI rating.
The most important thing to remember about AMA Guides Chapter 13 is to follow the instructions in the text in
establishing a rating for any brain, spinal cord, or peripheral nerve injury that is permanent and verifiable by
objective testing. There are different FEC adjustments for the various disorders that are ratable under Chapter 13 of
the AMA Guides. The FEC adjustments range from a ranking of [2] to [8] depending upon the central or peripheral
nervous system involved. See the 2005 PDRS, pages 2-2 to 2-3. Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of
body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
Many physicians are using Table 13-3 on page 312 of the AMA Guides to rate headaches based on “Episodic Loss
of Consciousness or Awareness,” which refers to a “Paroxysmal disorder with predictable characteristics and
unpredictable occurrence that does not limit usual activities but is a risk to the individual or limits daily activities.”
Other physicians are using Table 13-11 on page 331, “Impairment of Cranial Nerve V (Trigeminal Nerve)” to rate
headaches since the nerve distribution for most headaches involves the trigeminal nerve. The DEU raters will
provide a 3% WPI rating under these tables if a physician justifies the reason for the headaches being industrially
related.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.14
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.14 AMA Guides Chapter 14: Mental and Behavioral Disorders

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 14.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 14: MENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS
• REFER TO THE DSM 5 FOR PROPER DIAGNOSES
• REFER TO THE 2005 PDRS PSYCHIATRIC SECTION FOR GAF TO WPI
The most important medical-legal observation about AMA Guides Chapter 14, the “psyche” chapter, is that there
are no whole person impairments due to mental or behavioral disorders. The stated reason is that there is not
enough empirical evidence to support a reliable, objective, and uniform system of assessment. We know from our
experience in dealing with psyche cases in workers’ compensation that each person’s  mental condition can
change. There are remissions and relapses that are unpredictable even for the most serious and severely disabling
mental conditions.
That being said, the authors of the AMA Guides acknowledge that mental and behavioral conditions can be
debilitating. AMA Guides Chapter 14 is based upon the concepts adopted and accepted by the Social Security
Administration (SSA) for disability claims, and the model of analysis is one that will sound familiar to you since the
eight work function impairments in workers’ compensation cases under the 1997 Rating Schedule were derived
from the SSA psychiatric review technique (which is evidence based, peer reviewed, and nationally accepted).
Many of us in workers’ compensation law, who also practice Social Security disability law, use the model in AMA
Guides Chapter 14 to educate our clients in testifying and describing to doctors on how an injury or illness affects
their daily activities.
The rules are simple and straightforward, i.e., there has to be a DSM-based diagnosis using the now obsolete five-
axis model:
• AXIS I: Psychiatric diagnosis
• AXIS II: Personality disorders/mental retardation
• AXIS III: General medical conditions
• AXIS IV: Psycho/social considerations
• AXIS V: GAF score
On May 10, 2013, the American Psychiatric Association adopted the DSM-5 to replace the DSM-IV TR. The DSM-5
eliminated the five-axis model as obsolete and not supported parametrically. See Chapter 9 of this guidebook on
the use of the DSM-5 and California psychiatric injury cases.
Page 2 of 5
§ 3.14 AMA Guides Chapter 14: Mental and Behavioral Disorders
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many psychiatrists and psychologists feel that they are in a conundrum. They utilize the diagnostic criteria
using the DSM-5 but revert to the DSM-IV TR to give the GAF score associated with the WPI from the 2005
PDRS. But the Axis I through V of the DSM-IV TR is now obsolete. Many physicians still utilize the DSM-IV
TR instead of using the DSM-5. The main reason why is the belief, not debated here, that the DSM-5
emphases the use of medication as first line therapy over psychotherapy. See the discussion of this issue in
Chapter 9 of this guidebook. So when you depose a physician, ask him or her which diagnostic criteria he or
she is using and why. There is no case law that prohibits use of both DSM tools—one for diagnosis and the
other for rating.
The mental condition must affect the person’s personal, social, and occupational functioning in order to be
considered to result in a “psychiatric impairment.” The psychiatric impairment must be determined from the context
of a psychiatric condition—its history, the ability for the person to function over time, and his or her response to
treatment.
The doctor should be aware of the person’s ADL functioning as well as a work evaluation. The AMA Guides require
a clinical assessment of a person and a diagnosis. In addition, an assessment of the four spheres of functioning
must be made:
1. The person’s ADL functioning
2. The person’s social functioning (communicate, get along with others, interacting with public, supervisors, and
co-workers)
3. The person’s ability to maintain concentration, persistence, and pace (task completion)
4. The person’s ability to tolerate increased mental demands (adaptation), e.g., how to adapt to stressful
situations, deterioration, or de-compensation in work or work-like setting.
A person’s independence, appropriateness, effectiveness, and sustainability in performing activities listed above
have to be assessed by the physician. A mental status exam and psyche testing are not enough—the doctor must
have a real life history. Even though Chapter 14 does not have WPI ratings for psychiatric impairments, many
physicians are now using the activities listed above in AMA Guides Chapter 14 as a template for medical reports to
describe and justify a GAF score rating in a case. The format suggested above almost assures the physician who
uses it will cover all relevant psychiatric issues in a case and will encourage the development of medical reports
that constitute substantial medical evidence when all relevant issues are discussed by the physician. Page 365 of
the AMA Guides has a list of work function impairments based on psychiatric functioning in the workplace.
Interestingly, this is only one of two places in the AMA Guides that actually mention workplace impairment of
function—Table 6-9 the hernia impairment rating table, which includes a “no heavy lifting” restriction, is the other
one.
AMA Guides Chapter 14 advocates psyche testing and for the doctor to observe the patient taking the testing to
evaluate his or her concentration, persistence, and pace (the MMPI has over 500 questions). The doctor is required
to evaluate the mental condition’s residual symptoms that exist even with psychoactive medications to determine
impairments. The doctor is also required to assess the side effects of psychoactive medications in determining
impairments, and AMA Guides Chapter 2 allows a doctor to estimate the impairment due to the side effects of
medications or independent impairments that are caused by the medications themselves.
The AMA Guides Chapter 14 also indicate on page 360 that the doctor must evaluate the person’s motivation: “…
[M]otivation is the link between impairment and disability.” The Guides further state: “… [T]he degree of vocational
limitation of the individual with impairment of function is of paramount importance to the evaluator. This limitation
Page 3 of 5
§ 3.14 AMA Guides Chapter 14: Mental and Behavioral Disorders
may range from normal to total.” The doctor should state what the predicted duration is of an impairment. Is
remission likely? How can the impairment change over time? The doctor should note what a person’s mental
impairments are with and without medication.
One of the most important quotes in AMA Guides Chapter 14 is set forth on page 361: “… [I]mpairment from a
mental disorder can be just as real and severe as the impairment resulting from an injury or other illness.” Again,
the authors of the AMA Guides caution against using impairment ratings for mental conditions: “Percentages are
likely to be used inflexibly by adjudicators, who then are less likely to take into account the many factors that
influence mental and behavioral impairments.” They go on to state: “Current research finds little relationship
between psychiatric signs and symptoms with those identified during a mental status examination and the ability to
perform competitive work.”
The AMA Guides Chapter 14 gives an example on page 362: “… [T]he circumstances of a given case might
suggest a prophylactic  preclusion from certain types of tasks or work settings. For example, a person with
symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder that date from a robbery and assault might require a prophylactic
preclusion from jobs involving contact with the general public or handling large sums of money.” The AMA Guides
define stress in the work environment to include attendance, making decisions, scheduling, completing tasks, and
interacting with supervisors and peers.
The AMA Guides establish in Table 14-1 on page 363 a five-class assessment of impairments in the four spheres of
functioning listed above in terms of severity: no impairment, mild, moderate, marked and extreme. One area of
functioning that is extremely impaired or two or more marked impaired functions preclude performance of any
complex task such as work. Moderate impairment in all four spheres result in limitations in many but not all complex
tasks. Mild and moderate limitations in all four spheres reduce performance, but do not preclude some performance
of them. The AMA Guides state that a moderate impairment for all four spheres does not mean a 50% WPI.
The AMA Guides require an assessment of the severity of impairment based upon the effects of treatment,
structured settings, and variability of mental disorders, including any history of remissions, workplace function
assessments, and the known effects of common mental and behavioral conditions.
As stated above, page 365 of the AMA Guides contains an excellent workplace function assessment model using
the following topics:
1. Understanding and memory
2. Sustained concentration and persistence
3. Social interaction
4. Adaptation
Counsel should use this framework from Chapter 14, page 365 for cross-examination of physicians in determining
the most accurate GAF score and ultimate WPI rating as a result of psychiatric impairment. Each workplace
function assessment has its own subcategories for physicians to consider with respect to impairment of function:
1. Understanding and memory—ability to:
a. Remember procedures related to work activities;
b. Remember and understand short, simple instructions;
c. Remember and understand detailed instructions.
2. Sustained concentration and persistence—ability to:
a. Carry out short, simple instructions;
b. Carry out detailed instructions;
c. Maintain attention and concentration for extended periods of time;
Page 4 of 5
§ 3.14 AMA Guides Chapter 14: Mental and Behavioral Disorders
d. Perform work within a given schedule,
e. Regular attendance and punctuality;
f. Work in a routine without supervision;
g. Work with others or in close proximity without distraction;
h. Make simple work related decisions;
i. Complete a normal work day and week without interruptions from psychologically based symptoms;
j. Perform work at a consistent pace without unreasonable number of and unreasonably long rest periods
3. Social interaction—ability to:
a. Relate to general public;
b. Ask for assistance;
c. Accept instructions;
d. Respond appropriately to criticism from supervisors;
e. Get along with co-workers and peers without distractions or exhibiting behavioral extremes;
f. Socially appropriate behaviors;
g. Adherence to basic standards of neatness and cleanliness.
4. Adaptation—ability to:
a. Respond to changes in work setting;
b. Be aware of hazards and to avoid them;
c. To travel to and from work and in unfamiliar places;
d. To set realistic goals
e. To make plans independently of others
These items sound like a more detailed eight-work function impairment list that we have been using in workers’
compensation psyche cases for years. In fact, they are derived directly from the SSA as stated above. This
framework may also be utilized to develop the record for alternative WPI ratings for psychiatric impairment using
Tables 14-1 and Table 13-8 Mental and Behavioral Impairments on page 325 of the AMA Guides.
The AMA Guides on page 366 also specifically addresses Somatoform Pain Disorders and lists three diagnostic
criteria for its use. As discussed in Chapter 9 of this guidebook, Somatoform Pain Disorder is no longer recognized
as a diagnosis—under the DSM-5 it is now called “Somatic Related Disorders” which has a host of variations. The
AMA Guides also confirms that malingering is a psychiatric diagnosis and is not to be taken lightly. The examples
the AMA Guides authors provide of psychiatric impairments are not helpful for workers’ compensation purposes
because they do not involve any type of work related psychiatric conditions.
At the end of AMA Guides Chapter 14 on pages 370–371 is a model medical report for a psychiatric assessment.
However, it is missing a causation section.
The FEC adjustment under the 2005 PDRS for any psychiatric condition is the highest in the eight ranks because of
the research that shows that the mentally ill have the most difficulty earning a living and that there is a profound
effect on a person’s future earning capacity if he or she suffers from a mental condition. The FEC adjustment for a
psychiatric impairment is a [8], which means that the WPI rating determined in the 2005 PDRS is increased by 40%.
See the 2005 PDRS, page 2-3. So if a person has a GAF score of 50 (severe symptoms or severe effect of mental
condition on personal, social, or occupational functioning), he or she has a WPI psychiatric impairment rating of
30% WPI. See the 2005 PDRS, page 1-14 for the GAF score and page 1-16 for the conversion from the GAF score
Page 5 of 5
§ 3.14 AMA Guides Chapter 14: Mental and Behavioral Disorders
to a WPI rating. That WPI rating of 30% is increased by the FEC rank of [8] to a 42% standard psychiatric
permanent disability rating without regard to occupation or age, which may increase or decrease the rating.
Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4
or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.15
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
[1] Discussion and Analysis

The following is a quick reference of common medical
conditions that are found in AMA Guides Chapter 15.
There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a
condition may be indirectly work related in certain
circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can
result in impairments that are discussed in multiple
chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 15: THE SPINE
• ALL DISORDERS INVOLVING THE CERVICAL
SPINE, THORACIC SPINE, LUMBAR SPINE;
SACRUM, PELVIS AND CORTICOSPINAL
TRACT
QUICK
REFERENCE
DRE METHOD
LUMBAR SPINE:
TTABLE 15-3, PAGE
384
DRE METHOD
THORACIC SPINE:
TTABLE 15-4, PAGE
389
DRE METHOD
CERVICAL SPINE:
TTABLE 15-5, PAGE
392
CORTICOSPINAL
TRACT:
TTABLES 15-6(a) TO
15-6(g), PAGES 396–
397
ROM METHOD STEP
1
TABLE 15-7, PAGE 404
ROM METHOD STEP
2
TLUMBAR FLEX/EXT
TABLE 15-8, PAGE 407;
TLUMBAR LAT BEND
TABLE 15-9, PAGE 409
TTHORACIC FLX/EXT
TABLE 15-10, PAGE
411
Page 2 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
TTHORACIC ROT
TABLE 15-11, PAGE
414
TCERVICAL FLX/EXT
TABLE 15-12, PAGE
418
TCERVICAL LAT BEND
TABLE 15-13, PAGE
420
TCERVICAL ROT
TABLE 15-14, PAGE
421
ROM METHOD STEP
3
TNEUROLOGIC
TABLES 15-15
THROUGH TABLE 15-
18, PAGE 424
The spine is divided up into separate sub-regions: cervical, thoracic, lumbar and sacrum. The spine also
includes the spinal cord (corticospinal tract) and pelvis. The neck and back are considered the same region.
There are two methods of determining whole person impairments due to spinal conditions. The primary method
is called the DRE method or Diagnosis Related Estimates.
The second and more difficult method is the Range of Motion (ROM), which is a three-step process: a spinal
diagnosis chart rating combined with the rating from the range of motion measurements combined with
neurological (sensory and motor) function deficit ratings.
The AMA Guides instruct us to use the DRE method if the spinal condition is due to an injury. If the spinal
condition is not due to an injury, or if the DRE method does not make sense or is not fair, or if the disorder
involves more than one level within a sub-region (e.g., spinal fusion at L-4 to L-5 and L-5 to S-1), then you use
the ROM method. If you use both methods, then you adopt the method with the highest whole person
impairment.
The AMA Guides imply that doctors should use both methods in cases involving fusions, recurrent disc
herniations, vertebral fractures, spinal stenosis, facet joint stenosis, and any other disorders that affect the
spine’s range of motion, especially if more than one level within a sub-region is involved.
We know that when there is spinal surgery or a recurrent disc injury or stenosis within one sub-region, the ROM
method usually results in a higher WPI rating then the DRE method, especially when there is neurological
impairments—sensory such as numbness in a leg along the sciatic/tibial/peroneal nerve distribution or motor
like drop foot—due to an L5 radiculopathy.
For failed back syndrome cases, use the DRE or ROM methods in AMA Guides Chapter 15 and possibly AMA
Guides Chapters 14 and 18 for psyche and pain-related impairments. The doctor must include in his or her
report a description of how symptoms affect a person’s ADLs and how the impairment was calculated. The
doctor must take into account diagnostic studies and the effect of treatment on symptoms.
Table 15-1 on page 375 shows the required physical exam including range of motion, any atrophy, reflexes, or
other neurological signs with sitting, standing, and recumbent positions. Table 15-2 on page 376 shows the
cervical and lumbar nerve distributions and sensory, motor, and reflex deficits. Figures 15-1 and 15-2 on page
377 show the skin areas innervated by the cervical and lumbar nerve distributions.
Table 15-1 on page 375 requires an evaluation based upon muscle spasm, muscle guarding, asymmetry of
spinal motion, non-verifiable radicular root pain, reflexes, weakness and loss of sensation, atrophy,
radiculopathy and positive EMG/NCV evidence of radiculopathy, altered motion segment integrity, spinal cord
damage, and bowel/bladder control dysfunction.
Page 3 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
COMMON MISTAKE:
There is a huge disconnect between what the text of the AMA Guides say about when to use the DRE
and when to use the ROM methods. Remember, the AMA Guides never refers to a cumulative trauma
injury. You must always read Chapter 15 in the context that the authors never intended to develop a
rubric for rating permanent impairment of the spine due to cumulative trauma activities.
Pages 379 through 384 include the text written by the authors and editors of the spinal chapter and describe
when to use the DRE and ROM methods. There are conflicting and inconsistent statements in the text when
you read the entire chapter. For example, the authors and editors of the AMA Guides do not include
consideration that a spinal disorder can be caused by cumulative trauma. Only nine states actually recognize
cumulative or “repetitive motion” injuries in the respective jurisdictions. So when you read the inclusion criteria
for use of the ROM method, there is nothing that refers to spinal conditions caused by repetitive trauma
activities. Another example is the statement that the ROM method only applies when there is a radiculopathy
(see page 380, item 4(b)). However, the spinal diagnosis table, Table 15-7 includes WPI ratings for spinal
disorders that may not include the existence of a radiculopathy. So you have to read the entire text in context
with California workers’ compensation law and the actual tables on which WPI ratings are based.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Counsel should always pay attention to the items in Box 1 on pages 382 and 383 in the AMA Guides
when you depose a physician. For example, many PQME physicians will deny a DRE Category 3
lumbar spinal rating when the patient complains about a lower extremity radiculopathy and an
EMG/NCV is negative. But the authors in Box 1 state that electro-diagnostic testing does not detect all
radiculopathies.
Box 15-1 on page 382 shows the clinical findings necessary to place a person into a DRE category. The AMA
Guides indicate that 90% of all nerve related pathology in the lumbar spine occurs at the L3-4, L4-5, and L5-S1
levels. Reflexes should be tested repeatedly for reproducibility, and reflexes once “lost” due to previous injury or
disease rarely return. The AMA Guides warn that a positive imaging test (MRI) alone is not sufficient to qualify
for a DRE category. However, a positive EMG/NCV that supports a radiculopathy will qualify for at least a DRE
Category III impairment.
When counsel takes a doctor’s deposition in a spinal injury case, you must be familiar with each of the items
listed in Box 1 on pages 382 and 383 of the AMA Guides. Virtually every class that is taught about the spinal
disorders chapter includes a copy of Box 15-1 in your materials. The authors define terms such as “muscle
spasm,” “muscle guarding,” “asymmetry of spinal motion,” “non-verifiable radicular root pain,” “reflexes,”
“weakness and loss of sensation,” “atrophy,” “radiculopathy,” “electro-diagnostic verification of radiculopathy,”
“alteration of motion segment integrity,” “cauda equine syndrome,” and “urodynamic tests.”
For example, under “electro-diagnostic verification of radiculopathy” the authors state: “[EMG/NCV studies]
does not detect all compressive radiculopathies and cannot determine the cause of the nerve root pathology.”
So, arguably, a physician based on his or her knowledge, experience, education, and ability to evaluate a
patient may assign a DRE Category III based on his or her clinical judgement even though there is no
“verifiable” radiculopathy. As is always the case though, that physician must be able to explain, with reasonable
medical probability how and why he or she has concluded that there is a radiculopathy that justifies a DRE
Category III WPI rating rather than a DRE Category II WPI rating.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Page 4 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
Many PQME reports erroneously assign a DRE II rating for a lumbar spine when it should be a DRE III
simply because the physician fails to review prior treating physician reports that show recurrent signs,
symptoms, and complaints of a radiculopathy that is clinically present (e.g., positive straight leg raise
tests, diminished sensitivity to light touch, etc.). It is very rare to have a confirmed herniated disc that
results in a permanent resolution of radiculopathy without surgery. Even when there is decompression
surgery, there may still be post-operative signs of radiculopathy, or complete resolution of
radiculopathy, but it doesn’t matter since the patient would still get a DRE 3 rating due to the surgery
itself.
In describing the ROM method, the AMA Guides provide normal ranges of motion for adjacent vertebral
segment within each sub-region of the spine. For example, normal segmental ROM in the lumbar spine is from
12 degrees at L1 to L2 to 20 degrees at L5 to S1. Lateral bending for the cervical spine is up to 5–6 degrees
and for the lumbar spine is up to 9 degrees at L3-L4. Axial rotation in the neck is 30–40 degrees in the upper
neck, 5–6 degrees in the lower neck, and minimal in the lumbar spine (twisting is caused by hip movement).
Flexion-extension X-rays are essential to determine the extent of motion segment integrity (e.g., from a fusion,
infection, fracture, or surgical arthrodesis).
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many physicians will fail to properly diagnose a serious lumbar spinal condition when there is normal
MRI imaging but where the patient has severe pain with bending backwards (extension) and right/left
bending. This is called “mechanical back pain” by physicians and is usually a sign of spondylolisthesis
which is not visible on an MRI scan. The best way to diagnose it is by flexion-extension X-rays. In a
doctor deposition, be sure to ask if any flexion extension X-rays were taken and ask to see the
radiologist’s report. Many PQME physicians will call this a “back sprain, DRE Category 1, 0% WPI”
when in fact it is a serious, lumbar spinal condition that rates considerably higher than 0% WPI.
For measuring the range of motion for each sub-region of the spine, the AMA Guides have separate charts and
tables for the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar areas. See the normal ranges in the discussion below on the ROM
method. The doctor must state why he or she is using the ROM method instead of the DRE method.
Tables 15-3, 15-4, and 15-5 on pages 384, 389, and 392, respectively, are the three DRE classes I through V
for lumbar, thoracic, and cervical whole person impairments, respectively. These charts will be most often used
in workers’ compensation back and neck cases. You will note that there are ranges within each class, and the
cervical classes produce a higher WPI scale than the lumbar and thoracic ones. Use the higher DRE rating
within a class if objective findings or residual symptoms impact a person’s ADLs to a greater extent despite
treatment.
If there is more than one spinal sub-region involved (e.g., neck and low back), use the DRE or ROM method for
the worse affected sub-region and then use the DRE method for the remaining sub-region and then combine
the WPI ratings for each sub-region to obtain an overall spinal WPI rating. Recently there was a case involving
a workers’ compensation defense attorney who rear-ended a utility truck on a freeway while en-route to a
WCAB hearing. The Applicant was severely injured and had spinal fusion surgery from C-3 through T-2 and L-3
through S-1. The AME orthopedic surgeon assigned WPI ratings for the cervical spine impairment and the
lumbar spine impairment. At the AME’s deposition, he asked the Applicant’s attorney why there was a need for
the deposition. The AME forgot about assigning a separate WPI for the thoracic spine impairment since the
fusion went through two thoracic vertebrae.
Table 15-6 on page 396 covers spinal cord injuries and their effect on upper and lower extremity function,
bladder control, swallowing, and sexual and respiratory dysfunction. See also AMA Guides Chapter 13 (central
and peripheral nervous system).
Page 5 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
COMMON MISTAKE:
Experience has shown that many PQME physicians, even in 2018, do not know how to use the Range
of Motion (ROM) method to evaluate WPI for each spinal region. If you take a deposition of a physician
and he or she states that the DRE method always results in a higher rating than the ROM method, that
is a red flag that the physician does not know how to use the ROM method at all. This author has taken
many depositions of orthopedic spinal surgeons who insisted on this mistaken assumption. They
thought, erroneously, that the ROM method just involves measuring the loss of motion of the spine
using the loss of motion charts and that’s it. They forgot about the 12 other steps the ROM method
requires for physicians to do in order to have an accurate WPI rating using the ROM method.
The ROM method, which is summarized on page 402 of the AMA Guides, sets forth the 13 steps that need to
be followed. First, you use Table 15-7 on page 404, which is the diagnosis based impairment and  which
indicates a conversion chart to WPI. This covers fractures, discogenic, or soft-tissue lesions, spondylosis or
spondylolisthesis, and stenosis, whether operated on or not. Do not confuse this chart with the DRE
method. Use Table 15-7 only for the ROM method. Notice that Table 15-7 refers to under Section II(B.)
“Intervertebral disk or other soft tissue lesion” cases involving “… minimal degenerative changes on structural
tests” or under Section II(C.) “… moderate to severe degenerative changes on structural tests.” These criteria
for use under the ROM method are routinely ignored or un-noticed by evaluating physicians as viable inclusion
criteria for using the ROM method when a person has multi-level degenerative disk disease or spondylosis. The
term “structural tests” are referred to in a footnote to include X-rays, MRI and CT scans diskograms, and
myelograms.
Second, you find the range of motion measurements in the sagittal, frontal, and transverse planes (e.g., flexion,
extension, lateral right and left bending for the lumbar spine). Compare these to the charts in Tables 15-8 and
15-9 on pages 407 and 409, respectively. If a loss of motion exists within the same sub-region but in different
planes (e.g., flexion, extension, rotation), you add the impairments due to the loss of motion. Use the following
information as a guide for normal ranges of motion for each sub-region of the spine:
COMMON MISTAKE:
Physicians do not accurately rate the loss of motion in the first place, and you must check their work. In
many cases we have seen a PQME or treating physician use the Combined Values Chart with each
range of motion measurement. That is NOT correct. In all range of motion testing you ADD the
impairment ratings for any loss of range of motion within a sub-region and then COMBINE that rating to
the spinal disorder rating from Table 15-7, page 404, and then COMBINE that rating with the
neurological deficit rating.
Third, you determine any impairments due to neurological deficits (Table 15-15 for sensory method, Table 15-
16 for loss of strength, Table 15-17 for cervical and thoracic nerve roots, Table 15-18 for lumbar and sacral
nerve roots; see page 424). Convert neurological impairments from upper or lower extremity impairments to
WPI (40% for lower, 60% for upper).
Finally, you combine the diagnosis based rating from Table 15-7 on page 404 with the ratings from the range of
motion and the ratings from the neurological motor and sensory impairments.
The legal community, unlike the medical community, does not need to buy inclinometers or goniometers.
Tables 15-8 through 15-14 on pages 407, 409, 411, 414, 418, 420, and 421, respectively, are ratings for
ankylosis and ROMs. Spinal neurological ratings are set forth in Tables 15-15 through 15-18 on page 424 and
include listings for neurological deficits for sensory and motor loss. Doctors are instructed to take three readings
in ROM method and to take an average.
Page 6 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
The AMA Guides on page 399 states that if a measurement is over 50 degrees, then each of 3 tests for ROM
should be within 10% of the mean. If the measurement is under 50 degrees, then each of 3 tests for ROM
should be within 5 degrees of the mean. ROM testing should be repeated up to 6 times to get 3 consecutive
measurements. The greatest source of error is the doctor’s inexperience or lack of knowledge. Prior to
the ROM testing, the patient should be given two “warm-ups.”
COMMON MISTAKE:
Some attorneys ask evaluating physicians in a deposition what kind of instrument was used to evaluate
a patient’s range of motion. Most inclinometers and goniometers are accurate to 2 degrees of arc.
However, counsel should be aware that a 10% variance of accuracy in measurements is acceptable by
the authors of the AMA Guides. The point here is that as long as a physician uses one of these
instruments and not just the “eye-ball” approach, there is no real chance of changing the ratings based
on what instrument was used.
Table 15-10 on page 411 covers lumbar ROM testing including measuring flexion, extension, straight leg
raising (SLR), lateral bending, and ankylosis. There are separate sections for neck, lumbar, and thoracic levels.
Table 15-20 on page 429 is a summary analysis for the entire spine, and you should refer to it for the sake of
completeness in a workers’ compensation case. One note about SLR testing: We know the doctors can “fudge”
on whether the sitting or supine SLR tests are accurate. A person screaming in pain at 60 degrees has the
same degree of screaming and pain at 90 degrees.
COMMON MISTAKE:
In real medicine, a straight leg raise (SLR) test is a widely used and accepted standard mechanical test
for radiculopathy from a lumbar spine nerve root irritation. Counsel should always see if an evaluating
physician has performed this very important test. This test puts stress on the sciatic nerve and if there
is compression at the lumbar spine level, radiculopathy will be enhanced on the side of the nerve root
impingement. In order to tell if a patient is exaggerating an SLR test, the physician should do one while
the patient is supine on the examination table and again later while the patient is sitting on the edge of
the table and the physician raises each leg 90 degrees. The results should be the same.
Also, make sure the physicians who conduct the physical examinations are honest in their assessment of range
of motion measurements. There is a huge difference between active range of motion, passive range of motion,
and assisted range of motion. The AMA Guides only acknowledge active range of motion measurements of
flexion, extension, lateral bending, and rotation. Passive and active-assisted ROM testing are not allowed.
Active ROM means what the patient is able to do on his or her own; the doctor does not help. Passive ROM
means the physician moves the patient’s body part being measured. Assisted ROM means the physician holds
the body part and “guides” the movement. The only valid measurements are the ones made by voluntary
movement by the patient, not movements made or caused by the physician holding the patient. The only
exception may be the straight leg raising test, which requires the physician to move the patient’s leg from the
patient’s supine and sitting positions.
Over the years since the adoption of the AMA Guides 5th Edition in 2004, we continue to see misapplication of
the ROM method to determine accurate strict WPI ratings for spinal disorders. In too many cases, the
evaluating physician “eye-balls” ranges of motion and does not bother using an inclinometer or goniometer.
There is one PQME in particular who testified under oath that he never uses these instruments because he has
40 years of experience as a spinal orthopedic surgeon and doesn’t need to use them. Another PQME in 2016,
12 years after the AMA Guides were mandated to be used, testified that in all of his cases as a PQME, he has
a chiropractor who works in his office do all of the measurements. He was asked on the record by the attorney,
Page 7 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
“so what are you doing while the chiropractor does the ROM measurements on your patient, powdering your
nose?” Needless to say, the parties went to an AME in orthopedic surgery after each of these fiascos. Counsel
is warned that these practices are still occurring with regularity and you are reminded to refer to Labor Code
§ 4628, 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10606, and Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides which all mandate that the evaluating
physician is the one who conducts all measurements.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Recently, there was a case in which the PQME in physical medicine and rehabilitation was unable to
perform the actual examination himself due to his own disability and he had a surrogate chiropractor
perform the measurements of the applicant while the physician watched from his remote office via
telemedicine. The examining chiropractor did not sign the report, and the parties did not know in
advance that the telemedicine arrangement was from an Americans With Disabilities Act
accommodation. The WCAB held that it is possible for parties to agree in advance to a telemedicine
PQME examination wherein someone other than the physician performs the actual physical
examination of the applicant. This author seriously cautions against this type of arrangement due to the
fact that Labor Code § 4628 requires the person who writes the report be the person who examines the
patient. The WCAB panel itself calls Labor Code § 4628, the “anti-ghost writing” section. See Ilbra
Beitpolous v. California Correctional Healthcare Services [(2018) 83 Cal. Comp. Cases 1078 (Appeals
Board noteworthy panel decision)].
Note that many physicians are incorrectly applying the DRE method and the pain add-on allowed in AMA
Guides Chapter 18 (pain) and the 2005 PDRS (at page 1-12). For example, a DRE Category III rating for the
lumbar spine has a range of 10% to 13% (AMA Guides, Table 15-3, page 384) and covers a one level
laminectomy with a decent result. Some physicians think if there is a pain add-on, the 10% can be raised only
to the 13% WPI within the DRE Category III. This is not correct.
The physician is allowed to give the rating within that category (10%, 11%, 12%, or 13% WPI) plus up to a 3%
pain add-on if the back condition has had a poor result (meaning that the pain is in excess of that expected
from the medical condition) and the residual pain severely affects a person’s ADLs. Notice that the next
Category IV has a range of 20% to 23% WPI. Doctors are permitted to use the 3% pain add-on at any time
within any DRE category, even if the ultimate WPI rating is outside the original category. Thus, a DRE Category
III lumbar spine case can be rated up to 16% WPI with a full 3% pain add-on. See the 2005 PDRS, page 1-12,
and AMA Guides Chapter 18 (pain).
Many medical reports utilizing AMA Guides on spinal cases contain a DRE rating when a ROM rating would be
higher had the physician properly used the AMA Guides (you take the highest rating). In addition, physicians
are not performing flexion-extension X-rays in order to determine whether the ROM method should be used. If
flexion-extension X-rays show any kind of motion between two adjacent segments of the spine, the ROM
method should be included in the evaluation even if the condition is caused by a specific injury.
All spinal impairments for lumbar, thoracic, cervical, and pelvic injuries result in an FEC adjustment of [5],
except for some of the corticospinal tract impairments that take an FEC adjustment of [2], [5], or [7], depending
on the location of the spinal cord injury and what system or function is affected by it. See the 2005 PDRS,
pages 2-3 and 2-4. The adjustment factor of 1.4 is used for all WPI ratings for dates of injury on or after 1/1/13.
The text on pages 379–381 in the AMA Guides has conflicting and contradictory instructions on when it is
appropriate to use the ROM method instead of the DRE method. The question is whether radiculopathy must
be present in order for the ROM method to apply. Table 15-7 does not mention radiculopathy as a requirement
for use of the ROM method while the text implies in places that radiculopathy must exist in order for the ROM
method to apply and the DRE method otherwise should apply in the absence of radicular symptoms. This issue
is discussed in more detail in Chapter 4 of this guidebook. There are some unpublished WCAB panel decisions
Page 8 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
that have upheld individual judge’s opinions that radiculopathy is not required for the ROM method to apply as
long as the criteria in Table 15-7 is met and the treating or evaluating physician explains how and why the ROM
method applies in favor of the DRE method.
[2] Checklist for Compliance of Medical Report on Spinal Injuries
Since many of our cases involve spinal injuries, the following checklist will assist you in evaluating whether a
medical report complies with the AMA Guides:
1. Which method of determining spinal impairments do you use: DRE or ROM? (The physician must state
which method he or she is using in a case and why.)
2. Use the DRE method if:
• The impairment is a result of an “injury.” (The AMA Guides do not define the word “injury.” Does that mean
a continuous trauma injury is an “injury?”). See the discussion below on the “DRE gap” and the legal
definition of “injury,” and how these and other issues may affect which rating method is used in a given
case.
• When the cause of the impairment is not easily determined and if the impairment can be well
characterized by the DRE method.
3. Use the ROM method if:
• The impairment is not caused by an injury, and the cause of the impairment is uncertain.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Remember, physicians read the AMA Guides and the term “injury” only connotes a specific injury.
The authors of the AMA Guides do not contemplate that an “injury” includes a cumulative trauma
injury that is recognized in only nine states, including California. So when you have a PQME who
has not practiced medicine for very long in California, you need to educate the physician,
preferably before the date of the exam, what a cumulative trauma injury is. See Labor Code
§ 3208.1(b).
• The DRE method does not make sense, or an individual cannot be easily categorized in a DRE class.
• When there is multilevel involvement in the same spinal sub-region. Examples: Fractures at multiple
levels, disc herniations, stenosis, neural-foramina nerve root irritation, or bilateral radiculopathy.
• When there is alteration of motion segment integrity at multiple levels in the same spinal sub-region,
unless there is involvement of the corticospinal tract (in which case you use the DRE method for
Corticospinal Tract impairments).
COMMON MISTAKE:
In real medical practices, physicians do not refer to the term “motion segment integrity”, which
has no meaning at all. In the context of our cases, you must define that term as meaning that
there is any pathology that affects the integrity of the bony parts of the spine between adjacent
levels of the vertebrae. This could include movement between adjacent levels (spondylolisthesis),
degenerative changes (spondylosis), etc. See Chapter 9 of this guidebook for details on spinal
pathology.
• When there is a recurrent disc herniation with radiculopathy or a recurrent injury in the same spinal sub-
region.
Page 9 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
• When there are multiple episodes of other pathology producing alteration of motion segment integrity or
radiculopathy.
4. Use both the DRE and ROM methods and adopt the higher rating of the two if:
• There is a spinal fusion. Arguably, you should use the DRE method if the fusion involves one level but if
there are post-surgical neurological symptoms and limited range of motion, the ROM method will result
in a higher WPI rating.
• Spinal surgery with recurrent disc or stenosis at the same sub-region.
The following checklist will assist you in DRE cases:
• Which DRE category applies in this case?
• What is the basis for the physician to choose a specific DRE category?
• What is the basis for the physician to choose a specific rating within a DRE category?
• The physician is allowed to add up to 3% WPI for pain if the pain affects the applicant’s ADLs greater than
expected by the DRE category.
The following checklist will assist you in ROM cases:
• First use Table 15-7 on page 404 to determine the spinal disorder WPI rating. See the discussion below
on the “DRE gap” and the legal definition of “spinal disorders” and “soft-tissue lesion.”
• Then measure range of motion for spine (flexion, extension, lateral flexion for lumbar; flexion and rotation
for thoracic; flexion, extension, lateral flexion and rotation for cervical spine). Make sure that the
physician requires the patient to have three “warm-up” range of motion exercises prior to taking the
actual measurements. The physician needs to count three consecutive measurements out of six in
order to have valid testing. The physician is instructed to take the highest of the three range of motion
measurements.
• Add impairments for loss of range of motion using tables and instructions. Note that the ROM
measurements are listed separately for the lumbar, thoracic, and cervical spine sub-regions.
• Make sure that the physician correctly measures range of motion, especially for the lumbar spine. Many
physicians incorrectly measure range of motion of the lumbar spine by only giving the T-12
inclinometer reading, which is incorrect. The correct readings are as follows: For all flexion and
extension readings, you take the angle for T-12 minus the angle for S-1 using two inclinometers that
were  first calibrated at 0 degrees when the applicant is in a neutral standing position.
• Calculate sensory impairments using instructions for multiplying grade percentage loss of sensation/pain
times the value of nerve for sensory loss.
• Calculate motor impairments using instructions for multiplying grade percentage loss of motor function for
muscles innervated by spinal level times the value of nerve for muscle function.
• Combine sensory and motor function impairments.
• Calculate final ROM rating by combining WPI rating from Table 15-7 on page 404 with ROM WPI rating
combined with neurological WPI rating.
• Make sure that if the applicant still complains of radiculopathy post surgically, a repeat EMG/NCV testing
is probably reasonable to assess any neurological deficits. However, note that electro-diagnostic
testing does not necessarily rule out peripheral nerve deficits. The physician can still grade sensory or
motor deficits based upon the nerve distribution of the affected spinal level without a repeat EMG/NCV.
• Note that sometimes a patient will not know that there are neurological deficits without careful testing of
the sensory and motor nerve distributions by the physician.
• Any ROM rating without neurological assessment is suspect, especially if the applicant complains of any
radicular symptoms (such as numbness, tingling, or pain traveling down an arm or leg along the nerve
Page 10 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
distributions of the C5, C6, or C7 for the cervical sub-region, and L4, L5 or S1 levels for the lumbar
sub-region).
• Another common mistake that a physician will do to avoid performing the ROM method is to claim that the
S1 angles for flexion and extension added together is greater than 15 degrees of the tightest straight
leg raise testing and, therefore, the ROM method is invalid. This is probably not correct, unless the
applicant is truly exaggerating his or her active range of motion for flexion and extension. You will see
this validity test for the ROM method in the AMA Guides and on the charts for the examination
instructing the physician to indicate that the ROM testing was valid based upon the sum of the S1
readings at extension and flexion with that sum being within 15 degrees of the angle of the tightest
straight leg raise test.
• The AMA Guides instruct the physician that if the ROM testing is not valid, then the patient must return
another time for a re-examination and new ROM testing must be conducted with the validity test.
[3] The “DRE Gap”
There is significant confusion in the workers’ compensation community about whether a case should fall into a
DRE category I, II, or III for spinal injuries. In the instructions under AMA Guides, Chapter 15, Section 15.3,
page 383, the authors distinguish a DRE category I from a category II to a category III by stating:
… An individual in category I has only subjective findings. In category II, the individual has objective
findings but no verifiable radiculopathy or alteration of structural integrity, while in category III,
radiculopathy with objective verification must be present … If the individual has a radiculopathy caused by
a herniated disk or lateral spinal stenosis that responded to conservative treatment and currently has no
radicular symptoms or signs, he or she is placed in category II. Category III is for individuals with a
symptomatic radiculopathy either after medical or surgical treatment, or for individuals who have a history
of previous radiculopathy caused by disk herniation or lateral spinal stenosis but have improved or become
asymptomatic following surgery.
The term “objective verification” does not mean necessarily that there has to be a positive EMG/NCV evidence
of a radiculopathy. The authors of the AMA Guides have concluded that the radiculopathy, in order to be
verifiable, must be along a dermatome for sensory loss or pain, or the radiculopathy must demonstrate motor
function deficits. A verifiable radiculopathy should have an objective basis with the objective finding(s) on the
same side as the symptoms. The reason why the emphasis is not on requiring a positive EMG/NCV is because
of the general knowledge among neurologists who perform these tests that the tests do not show all types of
radiculopathy.
Counsel is advised to carefully read the instructions as quoted above when preparing for a deposition of either
the applicant or a physician in order to fully understand the differences between a DRE category II and category
III case. In fact, a patient can start as a DRE III rating but after treatment if the radiculopathy no longer exists,
the patient could theoretically become a DRE II. This is why sometimes you will see a treating physician provide
a DRE III rating but six months later when examined by a PQME or AME, there is no longer evidence of a
radiculopathy and the more recent evaluator assigns a DRE II rating.
COMMON MISTAKE:
If a radiculopathy ends after treatment either via spinal decompression surgery or epidural injections,
be very careful if a physician assigns what used to be a DRE Category III to a Category II impairment
rating. This is especially true since many conservative physicians will assign a DRE II to anyone who
had decompression surgery and the radiculopathy goes away. This author questions this approach in
the AMA Guides since decompression surgery alters the morphology of the spinal disc space,
increasing the risk of further nerve root irritation since future stress is placed on the level of the
surgery. If there was no surgery, and as of the time of MMI if there was a record of recurrent episodes
where the patient needed epidural injections with periodic improvement of radicular symptoms, the
patient is still probably a DRE III.
Page 11 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
In addition to the question of which spinal impairment rating method (DRE or ROM) applies in a given case,
there exists within the scheme of the DRE method what we are referring to as the “DRE gap.” A DRE category
I, which results in a 0% WPI rating, is an individual who has subjective complaints of a spinal condition with “no
significant clinical findings, no observed muscle guarding or spasm, no neurologic impairments, no altered
structural integrity and no other indication of impairments related to injury or illness and no fractures.” See AMA
Guides, Chapter 15, Tables 15-3, page 384 (lumbar spine), Table 15-4, page 389 (thoracic spine), and Table
15-5, page 392 (cervical spine).
However, a DRE category II, which results in a 5%–8% WPI rating, captures and includes patients who do
present with current objective findings that are compatible with a specific injury. In reality, the difference
between a DRE category I and a DRE category II are arbitrary, and, as a result, the DRE method probably
excludes many people who have spinal conditions from receiving a permanent impairment rating.
There are some people who are excluded from receiving permanent disability benefits who may have a
permanent impairment rating between 1% and 4% WPI since no such rating exists in the DRE method of
impairment ratings. In addition, the non-existent DRE rating of 4% could hypothetically result in up to an
additional 3% WPI pain add-on based upon AMA Guides, Chapter 18, and the 2005 PDRS, page 1-12. That
7% WPI is a potentially large “DRE gap” for some individuals who have a specific injury.
There is a school of thought in clinical medical practice that once a person has a spinal condition, they will
always have a spinal condition, and a musculoskeletal sprain or strain, or other soft-tissue injury, will continue
to intermittently cause muscle spasms, muscle guarding, decreased range of motion, or radiculopathy over an
unpredictable future in some patients. The AMA Guides DRE category I assumes that people with a sprained
back or neck recover within six months to a year, and a DRE category I impairment rating of 0% WPI is
justified. The reality in medical practice is that there are patients who intermittently have those symptoms and
their ADLs are significantly affected either on an actual or prophylactic basis for many years.
The patients who fall into the “DRE gap” may previously had objective evidence of decreased range of motion,
muscle spasms, muscle guarding, or radiculopathy, but had no objective evidence for those symptoms at the
time of the MMI examination. Alternatively, there may be a limited range of motion in the lumbar or cervical
spine at the time of the MMI examination, but no current objective reason for it other than a prior history of pain
from a musculo-ligament sprain or strain. Many physicians have assigned a DRE category I 0% WPI rating
based upon a literal interpretation of the DRE category I criteria.
Some physicians try to avoid the “DRE gap” by assigning a DRE category II for a case like this since a person
is complaining of pain with a decreased range of motion and his or her ADLs are affected even if the condition
is intermittently asymptomatic. As long as there is a pathophysiological explanation for the spinal symptoms,
the physician may be able to justify a WPI rating. Some physicians are also using the ROM method to get
around the “DRE gap” by using a liberal interpretation of when to use the ROM method and by calling a
musculoskeletal sprain or strain a “soft-tissue lesion” under AMA Guides, Table 15-7, page 404, then combining
that WPI rating with the ROM rating with no ratable neurological impairments.
[4] Other Medical-Legal Issues in Spinal Injury Cases
Physicians have certain beliefs about using the AMA Guides in workers’ compensation cases. Some doctors
utilize a literal interpretation of the descriptions and measurements within the DRE categories and utilize the
ROM method only if the specifically named circumstances apply in the instructions for use of the ROM method,
e.g., if there is lateral spinal stenosis within a sub-region, bilateral radiculopathy, recurrent disk herniation,
multiple fractures or herniation, or structural abnormalities within a sub-region.
However, language used in the AMA Guides is subject to interpretation from both medical and legal
perspectives. For example, the AMA Guides indicate that the DRE method is to be used if the spinal condition
is caused by an “injury.” At first glance, it would appear that almost all of our workers’ compensation cases arise
from an “injury,” and the DRE method, not the ROM method, will usually apply.
The authors of the AMA Guides never define the term “injury.” Nowhere in Chapter 15, The Spine, is the term
“continuous trauma” used. The authors of the AMA Guides never contemplated the California nuance that
Page 12 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
repetitive or heavy work activities or overuse can be a contributing factor for the development of a spinal or
other physical impairment. This leaves the door open for counsel to justify the use of the ROM method if the
DRE method is not fair or the applicant falls into the “DRE gap.”
In addition, in the ROM method, the term “spinal disorders” under AMA Guides, Table 15-7, page 404, is not
clearly defined. In addition, Table 15-7 describes the spinal disorder WPI rating by category under Section II,
“Intervertebral Disk or Other Soft-Tissue Lesion” and Section III, “Spondylolysis and Spondylolisthesis.” The
terms “spinal disorders” or “soft-tissue lesion” are not defined either in Table 15-7 or in the accompanying text.
A liberal interpretation of these terms could include annular tears, disk bulging, torn ligaments, musculoskeletal
strains or sprains, or any other “soft-tissue” condition that is visible on diagnostic imaging studies or other
objective testing.
A WCJ has the ultimate responsibility to resolve disputes, including medical-legal disputes, between the parties.
Are the DEU raters being trained on a literal interpretation of the use of the AMA Guides? Are the WCJs bound
to follow a literal interpretation of the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides as well? Is a WCJ
permitted by law to liberally construe the meaning of the terms used in the AMA Guides when applying them in
a workers’ compensation case? Labor Code §§ 3202 and 3202.5, and the constitutional mandate of providing
benefits to injured workers of this state expeditiously, inexpensively, and without encumbrances [see Cal.
Const., Art. IV, § 4] may allow a WCJ to accept a spinal injury rating under the ROM method in a case that may
only qualify for evaluation under a DRE category with a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides or as stated by
the DEU rater.
Hypothetically, an applicant may have a DRE category I 0% WPI rating using the DRE method and have a
rating of at least 7% WPI under the ROM method for the same “spinal condition” or “soft-tissue lesion.” Counsel
should develop the record on both sides to determine which method of spinal impairment rating properly applies
in a given case. Physicians should be advised by the parties as to which method, DRE or ROM, applies in a
case if the parties agree, or the physician should be requested to perform impairment rating evaluations using
both the DRE and ROM methods in every case and have a WCJ ultimately decide which method applies.
Since the AMA Guides use vague terms and definitions in a workers’ compensation context, the determination
in spinal injury cases as to which impairment rating method applies in a given case is as much a legal
conclusion as it is a medical conclusion. Case law will have to be developed to indicate what is meant by the
use of terms like “injury,” “soft-tissue lesion,” “spinal disorders,” and other terms that may have both medical
and legal meanings in the context of a California workers’ compensation case. For a more detailed discussion
about medical-legal issues concerning spinal injury cases, see Ch. 4, § 4.13, of this guidebook on developing
the record to obtain accurate ratings.
In many spinal injury cases, physicians, judges, claims examiners and attorneys place a great deal of
importance on the “amount” of disc bulging or disc herniation that exists at a given level in order to determine
how “serious” the condition is. In fact, some physicians and radiologists assign a grade from I through IV
(Grade I being mild to Grade IV being a surgical lesion) or in terms of how many millimeters of disc bulge of
herniation exists.
There are fundamental problems with assigning a grade or measuring disc bulges and herniations in terms of
millimeters. First of all, there is no distinction between what constitutes a disc “bulge” and what constitutes a
disc “herniation.” Aside from that lack of distinction, there are no nationally recognized accepted standards of
grading disc bulges and herniations nor for assigning any level of clinical or diagnostic significance to the
number of millimeters of them. In fact, the grading system (Grade I through Grade IV) has been used
extensively in cancer research and clinical practice to determine how extensive abnormal cancerous cell growth
exists and the prognosis for successful treatment.
A highly respected radiology group that is associated with a regional teaching medical center in Los Angeles
started the grading of seriousness of disc herniations and bulges and assigning significance to their size in
millimeters. The grading system was borrowed from accepted national standards for grading chondromalacia of
the patella, but really has no medical or legal meaning in terms of nationally accepted standards for labeling
spinal conditions based upon MRI or CAT scanning diagnostic imaging studies.
There are many people walking around with absolutely no symptoms and normal ADL functioning who have a
10mm disc herniation that is not impinging on any nerve roots, spinal cord, thecal sac or otherwise causing
Page 13 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
clinically significant spinal stenosis. There are other individuals who have a 2mm disc bulge that is clearly
causing acute or chronic pain with documented radiculopathy and significant effects on ADL functioning and
that could clinically be a surgical case for a micro-discectomy.
What counsel, and for that matter, the injured worker, should be concerned with in spinal injury cases is where
the disc bulge or herniation is located and does it impinge on or irritate a nerve root or spinal cord itself. If the
neural foramina has stenosis from a disc bulge or herniation or by other causes then the nerve is “pinched,” as
is commonly and informally referred to by physicians, which can cause clinically significant radiculopathy.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many physicians place too much emphasis on what diagnostic imaging tests show or do not show. The
AMA Guides places very heavy emphasis on diagnostic imaging studies to objectify a patient’s
physical complaints. However, a patient’s symptoms need to correlate with the imaging studies. After
all, you cannot operate on an MRI scan. What physicians look for is whether the patient’s clinical
findings correlate with the diagnostic studies. For example, an MRI scan that shows impingement on
the L5-S1 nerve root on the right where the patient has left leg pain does not correlate between the
patient’s symptoms and the diagnostic study result. This brings up a big point. Sometimes, the
radiologist misreads the MRI films. It has happened many times, and this author has asked treating
and evaluating physicians to view the actual MRI films and not rely on a radiologist’s report of those
films. In fact, when there has been more than one MRI of the same region, this author has insisted on
an “over-read” of both studies by the examining physician or a reputable radiologist to compare them.
QME or AME physicians who actually perform surgery on patients should know the most reliable
radiologists to do an over-read if the physician himself or herself is unable to do the over-read.
If a person has a congenitally narrow lumbar spinal canal (the average is 13mm in diameter), a small herniation
could cause terrible symptoms as if the herniation was over 6mm in diameter. In clinical medicine, the reason
why herniated discs at 6mm or greater is generally considered a “surgical disc” is because in most patients,
6mm is enough to impinge on a nerve root or cause narrowing of the neural foramina or spinal canal causing
symptoms.
This is why the AMA Guides requires diagnostic imaging studies and clinical findings of symptoms at a level
and the same side as the abnormality seen in the imaging. Do not be misled by a physician assigning a “grade”
to a diagnosis of a disc bulge or herniation and do not place a great deal of emphasis on the size of a bulge or
herniation. At the same time, remember as we age to over 40 years, generally spinal discs begin to lose water
content and disc height (called disc desiccation) along with other degenerative changes, including bulging
between 1mm and 3mm at multiple levels with or without symptoms.
These degenerative changes do not occur across the board but do occur on a population based average. There
are very young people who develop severe degenerative disc disease with disabling symptoms, and there are
very old people who have no evidence of symptoms of the normal aging process even with diagnostic imaging
evidence of degenerative disc disease. So you can see, reliance on diagnostic imaging studies alone is not
sufficient to draw any conclusions about a spinal condition. There has to be concordance between a patient’s
spinal symptoms, findings on a physical examination by the physician and the diagnostic studies combined, and
not based solely on the diagnostic imaging alone. Here is what the authors of the AMA Guides say about
specific degenerative spinal conditions, on page 383:
The DRE method recommends that physicians document physiologic and structural impairments relating to
injuries or diseases other than common developmental findings, such as (1) spondylosis, found in 7% of
adults; (2) spondylolisthesis, found in 3% of adults; (3) herniated disc without radiculopathy, found in
approximately 30% of individuals by age 40 years; and (4) aging changes, present in 40% of adults after
age 35 years and in almost all individuals after age 50. As previously noted, the presence of these
abnormalities on imaging studies does not necessarily mean the individual has an impairment due to an
injury.
Page 14 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
In addition, counsel is strongly advised that if there is any doubt about the accuracy of a radiologist’s MRI
report, actual review of the MRI films by an AME, PQME, or treating physician is in order. Recently, in 2016, a
treating spinal surgeon insisted on reviewing a July 2011 MRI film because the radiology report did not mention
any neural foramina stenosis even though the Applicant’s signs, symptoms, and complaints were consistent
with an L-5 right sided radiculopathy. Sure enough, when the treating surgeon reviewed the actual films during
his deposition, the films clearly showed an almost completely obliterated L-5 right neural foramina. The surgeon
testified that once a decompression surgery is performed, the Applicant’s low back would be like a tricycle
without a wheel and a two level spinal fusion would have to occur to stabilize his lumbar spine. The Applicant
went five years without proper treatment as a result of a radiologist’s mistake.
A discussion of a controversial issue is appropriate here on the subject of alternative rating methods “using the
four corners of the AMA Guides” as stated in the Guzman III case discussed in Chapter 7 of this guidebook.
Figure 15-19 on page 427 has been frequently used by physicians to describe lumbar or cervical spinal
impairments based on the partial loss of function of a sub-region of the spine and refers to the footnote under
the drawing. That footnote states: “The whole spine divided into regions indicating the maximum whole person
impairment of one region of the spine. Lumbar 90%, thoracic 40%, cervical 80%.”
COMMON MISTAKE:
Very few physicians understand Figure 15-19 on page 427 of the AMA Guides and the footnote below
the figure. The authors buried an explanation of why Figure 15-19 is in the book on page 9 of the AMA
Guides. This demonstrates the politics of medicine and the friction between orthopedic spinal surgeons
and occupational medicine physicians (who are the senior editors of the Guides).
Counsel and physicians are reminded that regional impairment ratings converted to WPI ratings is permitted by
the authors of the AMA Guides. In section 1.3, on page 9, the authors state: “Within some musculoskeletal
regions, a consensus group developed weights to reflect the relative importance of certain regions. For
example, different fingers or different areas of the spine are given different weights, representing their unique
and relative importance to the region’s overall functioning. These weights, which have gained acceptance in
clinical practice, have been retained to enable regulatory authorities to convert from a regional body to WPI
when needed.” This is a great example of why everyone needs to read the instructions in Chapters 1 and 2 of
the AMA Guides while applying the chapters, tables and figures listed for impairment ratings.
Some physicians, for example, are taking a two-level fusion of L4 through L5 and L5 through S1 and assigning
a 36% WPI rating based on the illustration that since the lumbar spine has five levels (L1 through L5) and the
maximum value of the lumbar spinal region is 90% WPI, the loss of two levels from a fusion is 18% WPI
multiplied times two levels = 36% WPI. This method is completely independent of the suggested mathematical
calculations that appear in the instructions above the figure on page 427. Some physicians accept this method
to describe a more accurate and reliable description of an injured worker’s loss of ADL and work functioning
while other physicians reject this altogether because of the fact that the lumbar spine does not lose its main
function due to a fusion—holding the torso up.
That being said, in serious injury cases, this method may be justified if and only if a physician adequately
explains why the DRE and ROM methods, or any other method within the AMA Guides, do not accurately and
reliably describe the effects of the injured worker’s impairment of function and disability from that impairment.
So far, there is no published appellate decision indicating whether or not this method is appropriate in a given
case. Until then, physicians should only use this method if there are significant spinal function deficiencies with
permanent objective medical evidence to support use of this figure and the alternative rating method.
Also, a discussion about sacro-illiac joint (SI joint) dysfunction is appropriate here in light of recent cases where
an injury appears to involve the lumbar spine but may also include SI joint dysfunction. The SI joint is where the
sacrum of the low back is joined with the pelvis. It is located in a completely different place than the L5-S1 level
of the lumbar spine.
Injury to the SI joint is usually as a result of a direct trauma to the joint such as when a person falls over six feet
and lands on his or her feet. The force of the sudden stop from a fall creates tremendous force on the lumbar
Page 15 of 15
§ 3.15 AMA Guides Chapter 15: The Spine
spine and SI joint. In fact, in one case, the injured worker was a high school history teacher who was running to
break up a fight between two students and when the teacher jumped over a stairway, he landed on his feet
about 10 feet below and sustained a herniated right-sided L-5 disc and suffered from right SI joint dysfunction.
The medical testing for SI joint dysfunction includes the FABER test or Patrick’s test. The “FABER test” stands
for “Flexion, Abduction, and External Rotation” and having a patient’s leg flexed and the thigh abducted
(pointing away from the body), and externally rotated. The physician puts pressure on the medial side of the
knee and if there is SI or hip dysfunction, the patient will complain of pain. Standard X-rays of the SI joints, both
sides, will show any arthritic changes to the joint area and can help rule out hip pathology. An MRI of the SI
joint will indicate the integrity of the soft tissue joint material.
Treatment of SI joint dysfunction is problematic. Surgery of the joint would only include a fusion which is rare
and usually has poor surgical outcomes. The most effective treatment of SI joint dysfunction include epidural
steroid injections into the joint and physical therapy. Physicians must closely perform differential diagnosis to
rule in or rule out a lumbar spine disorder that stands alone or also involves an SI joint. WPI rating of SI joint
dysfunction involves the use of Table 15-19 on page 428 of the Guides for a strict rating and station and gait
impairment under Table 17-5 or Table 13-15 as alternative ratings.
The FEC adjustment for spinal injuries and pelvic fractures under the 2005 PDRS is a [5], and corticospinal
tract impairments use an FEC of [5], [2], or [7], depending upon what system is affected by the corticospinal
tract condition. The FEC adjustment for pelvic fractures is a [5]. The FEC adjustment for corticospinal tract
impairments range from a [2] to an [8], depending upon the system affected by the corticospinal condition. See
pages 2-3 and 2-4 of the 2005 PDRS. Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of body for injuries
occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.16
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
[1] Overview

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides
Chapter 16. There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work
related in certain circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are
discussed in multiple chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 16: THE UPPER EXTREMITIES
• ALL DISORDERS INVOLVING THE SHOULDERS, UPPER ARM, ELBOW, FOREARM, WRIST,
HAND, THUMB AND FINGERS
• RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS INVOLVING THE HANDS
Practitioners will need to become used to obtaining ratings of the thumb, separate from the wrist, separate from
the hand, separate from the elbow, and separate from the shoulder. Then you do the other side.
There is a detailed worksheet at the beginning of the AMA Guides Chapter 16 on pages 436 and 437, so you
can make sure that all parts of the upper extremity have been evaluated. See AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Tables
16-1a and 16-1b, pages 436 and 437. Physicians should always try to use this two-page chart in all upper
extremity evaluation cases. Counsel should also use this summary chart as a checklist to make sure that
physicians correctly cover all possible ratable upper extremity conditions.
Remember, you must use the conversion chart to calculate upper extremity impairments into whole person
impairments (by multiplying the upper extremity impairment by .6).
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many liberally slanted PQME physicians have been caught by this author performing range of motion
testing on an upper extremity, such as the shoulder, and giving the measurements in whole person
impairments and then combining them with the Combined Values Chart. This is a trap for the unwary
defense attorney. Always make sure that measurements for upper extremity impairments are originally
made in upper extremity (UE) ratings (unless otherwise stated in the text of the Guides), combined
when appropriate, and then converted to WPI by multiplying the UE ratings times .6 to get the WPI
rating.
Note that hand dominance is not included in the impairment ratings in AMA Guides Chapter 16 (see instead
AMA Guides Chapter 13 (central and peripheral nervous system), Tables 13-16 and 13-22), but should be
considered when determining disability. See Table 16-3 on page 439. When you see a medical report from a
treating physician, QME or AME, be sure that you pay close attention to Table 16-1b on page 437 at the bottom
Page 2 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
of the page where the Roman numerals are located. Each Roman numeral, I through V, reminds you that
amputations, regional impairments (hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder), peripheral nerve system, peripheral
vascular system, and “other disorders not included in regional impairment” (such as a pain add-on up to 3%
WPI) are considered. While the instructions tell you to combine all five ratings for the upper extremities from I
through V, you do not combine them for California workers’ compensation purposes, as stated below, if there is
more than one part of the upper extremity that is injured.
COMMON MISTAKE:
The instructions in the AMA Guides about converting from upper extremity to whole person impairment
ratings and then using the Combined Values Chart are different from the instructions in the 2005 PDRS
(and as modified for post 1/1/13 dates of injury). See the discussion below. Make sure you rate each
upper extremity impairments separately first in one upper extremity (UE) and then convert each upper
extremity part to WPI and then use the combined values chart for impairments within an upper
extremity and then combine that rating with any other body part’s WPI ratings. Sounds confusing? It is.
Page 1-11 of the 2005 PDRS says: “Impairments of an individual extremity are adjusted and combined
at the whole person level with other impairments of the same extremity before being combined with
impairments of other body parts.” For example, an impairment of the left shoulder and elbow and wrist
would be combined before further combination of an impairment of the opposite shoulder, elbow, and
wrist or the lumbar spine.
The upper extremity deficits can be anatomic (e.g., amputation), diagnosis based (e.g. a resection arthroplasty)
or functional (e.g. grip loss due to sensory or motor deficits or both). The regional impairments  resulting from
the hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder are combined to provide the upper extremity impairment, and the thumb
impairments are added and then combined. These instructions are from the text in the AMA Guides, and differs
from the language in the 2005 PDRS which mandates that multiple impairments for one upper extremity body
part, such as a shoulder, need to be combined at the upper extremity level and then converted to whole person
impairment by multiplying the upper extremity impairment by .60 and then combining with any other WPI rating
for other parts of the same upper extremity. You evaluate each upper extremity separately, convert each into
whole person impairment (by multiplying times .6), then use the Combined Values Chart of page 604 for
bilateral upper extremity problems.
On page 434, the authors of the AMA Guides that impairments that result in functional impairment “measures
the individual’s motor performance of activities of daily living or of a specific task within a set time frame.” This
language is perpetually ignored by physicians insofar that work activities sometimes do involve performing a
specific task within a set time frame such as typing on a keyboard, piecework, and other hand-intensive work
that requires gripping, grasping, handling, fine manipulation, or gross manipulation. The authors go on to say
that impairment of a digit should be compared to an amputation of that digit. So a “total transverse sensory
loss” of a digit is equal to 50% of the amputation value of that digit. This means that if a nerve is totally non-
functional and it affects a finger, the rating is 50% of the value of a total amputation of that finger. For the
purpose of developing deposition questions of a physician, this language would permit, in an appropriate case,
to argue that a current WPI impairment rating is equal to a comparison of an amputated digit, hand, arm, etc.
See Figure 16-2 on page 441 and Figure 16-3 on page 442.
Also of interest is the language on page 435 wherein it is stated: “Impairment ratings in this chapter have not
been adjusted for hand dominance as is done in Chapter 13 … Hand dominance is difficult to objectively
measure and is not accounted for in these impairment ratings [in chapter 16]. Hand dominance may be right or
left, and may be marked or slight, or the individual may be completely ambidextrous. Hand dominance should
be considered in the determination of disability. Hand dominance may be, of course, be significant when
assessing disability.” [Underlined added in this quotation]. Counsel can request a physician to discuss hand
dominance if that is a factor in evaluating permanent impairment in a workers’ compensation case based on
this language.
Page 3 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
We are seeing great variation in medical reports on the same patient in upper extremity cases. This is due to
the fact that physicians are not using the AMA Guides correctly. In upper extremity cases involving carpal
tunnel syndrome (median nerve) or any elbow condition (ulnar nerve), you need to make sure the physician
measures motor function (muscle weakness, atrophy, range of motion) and neurological deficits (tactile and
two-point discrimination, pain, numbness, tingling, loss of sensation, or hyper-sensitivity). Under the 1997
Rating Schedule, when subjective complaints and loss of work capacity were of paramount importance, many
physicians did not perform as thorough an examination as is needed using the AMA Guides.
Physicians need to closely follow the instructions in AMA Guides Chapter 16, page 481, for peripheral nerve
disorders or else the injured worker will obtain an unfair result in his or her case. For example, the median
nerve accounts for a maximum 39% upper extremity (UE) rating for sensory function of that nerve distribution,
and it accounts for a maximum of 10% UE for motor function (see Table 16-15). The doctors are supposed to
determine the percentage loss of sensory function of that nerve (Table 16-10 on page 482) and multiply it times
the 39% UE using the charts in AMA Guides Chapter 16 (Table 16-15 on page 492 informs us the median
nerve accounts for a maximum 39% UE of sensory function) to determine total sensory upper extremity
impairment. So a 25% sensory or pain deficit for the median nerve at the wrist would be a 10% upper extremity
impairment after rounding to the nearest whole number.
Next you calculate motor function loss by using Table 16-11 on page 484, Figure 16-47 on page 487, and
Figure 16-50 on page 490. Follow the directions in Table 16-11, section (b) “Procedure” on page 484. First, you
determine the severity of the motor function loss in Table 16-11, section (a) “Classification” on page 484, and
then take this amount and multiply it times the maximum impairment amount in Table 16-13, 16-14, or 16-15 on
pages 489, 490, or 492, respectively, to determine the motor upper extremity impairment. The maximum motor
impairment value of the median nerve is 10% UE, so a 25% motor deficit due to the median nerve at the wrist is
a 2.5% upper extremity impairment, which is rounded to 3% UE impairment. Then you combine the motor and
sensory upper extremity impairments and convert again to WPI (by multiplying times .60). For more details, see
the section below, “Peripheral Nerve Disorders” in this guidebook.
In this guidebook we are using the median nerve as an example since so many of our workers’ compensation
cases involve carpal tunnel syndrome. However, you must follow these instructions for motor and sensory
deficits across the board in any upper extremity or lower extremity case that involves nerve damage.
In addition, you must make sure the physician lists impairment ratings for each sub-part of the upper extremities
separately. The 2005 PDRS has 21 separate rating categories for upper extremity injuries with five separate
FEC adjustments for different parts of the upper extremity. See pages 1-7 and 4-6 of the 2005 PDRS. If the
physician’s final report indicates “The patient has a WPI of 15% for his arm, hand, wrist and shoulder injury,”
the report is meaningless and not substantial evidence unless somewhere in the report the WPI is broken down
into the parts of the upper extremity that were injured.
Table 16-1 on page 438 converts impairments to the digits to impairment to the whole hand. Table 16-2 on
page 439 converts impairments of the hand to the impairment of the upper extremity. The hand is 90% of the
upper extremity. So if the entire hand is amputated, it is 90% of the total value of the upper extremity (60%),
and 90% of 60% is 54% WPI for an amputated hand. Table 16-3 converts the impairments of the upper
extremity to whole person impairment. The thumb is 40% of the hand, the index and middle fingers are each
20% of the hand, and the ring and pinky fingers are each 10% of the hand.
[2] ROM Measurements
[a] In General
There are very technical ROM measurements for the digits, hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder that we need
to leave to the doctors. However, counsel and judges should learn the methods of how the ROM
measurements work for each upper extremity component. There are many errors made by physicians in
applying the AMA Guides since they went into effect in California workers’ compensation cases, including
the way range of motion is measured in upper extremities. It is not unusual for a Disability Evaluation Unit
(DEU) Rater to issue a consultative rating in a litigated case that indicates a physician’s range of motion
Page 4 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
impairment ratings for upper extremities are not accurately performed or reported. Counsel should consider
obtaining a consultative rating from the DEU prior to a Mandatory Settlement Conference so that a possible
deposition of an evaluating physician can occur to correct errors in the measurements or methods of
determining WPI ratings.
Chapters 1 and 2 of the AMA Guides instruct physicians to use “normal” ranges of motion to compare to
measured ranges of motion in order to determine impairments due to loss of range of motion. The “normal”
ranges of motion are indicated within each chapter of the AMA Guides. For example, “normal” range of
motion of the wrist for flexion and extension is 60 degrees for flexion and 60 degrees of extension.
However, the instructions in Chapters 1 and 2 of the AMA Guides also indicate that valid measurements for
loss of range of motion can be accomplished by comparing the injured side to the contralateral uninjured
side for comparison. Thus, in the example of loss of range of motion of the wrist for flexion and extension, if
the uninjured wrist has 75 degrees of flexion and 75 degrees of extension while the injured wrist has 60
degrees for each, there would be a 15-degree loss of flexion and 15-degree loss of extension, even though
the AMA Guides indicate that normal range of motion for the wrist is 60 degrees each for flexion and
extension.
So always remember that the AMA Guides are only guides and that range of motion normals listed in the
AMA Guides may not apply in all cases. This is why physicians are allowed to compare an injured side to
an uninjured side to determine what is really “normal” in a person’s uninjured side when measuring range of
motion of the injured side.
The pie charts for range of motion for the fingers, thumb, wrist, elbow, and shoulder are easy to understand
once you get a handle on how they work. All pie charts in Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides are expressed in
upper extremity impairment ratings, and you have to convert all upper extremity impairment ratings to whole
person by multiplying the UE times .6 to equal WPI. See [b], below, on how to read and understand a pie
chart. Generally speaking, when you measure ranges of motion for a single upper extremity body part such
as a shoulder, wrist, or elbow, you add the impairments from loss of motion. So for a shoulder, there are six
ranges of motion and if any numbers up to all six ranges are limited, you add all UE ratings for that shoulder
loss of motion and combine with any other ratable UE impairment for that shoulder.
[b] How to Read and Understand a Pie Chart
Reading and understanding a pie chart is essential in determining impairment ratings involving the upper
extremities. Once you understand how to read one pie chart in the AMA Guides, you will be able to
understand all of them. Note that the AMA Guides do not include pie charts in any other chapter besides
Chapter 16.
As an example, review the pie chart in AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Figure 16-40, page 476, called “Pie Chart
of Upper Extremity Motion Impairments Due to Lack of Flexion and Extension of Shoulder.”
This pie chart must be used in conjunction with Figure 16-38, page 475, Shoulder Flexion and Extension.
All pie charts have a diagram nearby that shows precisely what ranges of motion the pie chart represents.
In this case, you must imagine Figure 16-40 superimposed over Figure 16-38 while determining range of
motion measurements.
The starting point for measuring shoulder range of motion, for either flexion or extension, is when the arm is
the straight down position, parallel to the side of the body. In this position, there are zero degrees of flexion
and zero degrees of extension. Flexion occurs when the entire extended arm is moved forward, via the
shoulder joint from its neutral position as far as one can go, all the way to having the arm straight up.
Extension occurs when the entire extended arm is moved backwards, via the shoulder joint from its neutral
position, as far back as one can go. As seen in both Figure 16-38 and the pie chart of Figure 16-40, the
maximum flexion is 180 degrees and the maximum extension is 50 degrees.
While the measurements are being taken, and while imagining the pie chart as superimposed over Figure
16-40, the degree measurements, flexion or extension, are located on the pie chart on the inner semi-circle,
designated as the “V” circle. (For those familiar with using protractors, the process is similar.) The “V” semi-
circle measures in equal increments of 10 degrees from the neutral zero degree position up to the
maximum positions the injured worker can attain.
Page 5 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
Each 10-degree range of motion increment located on the “V” range of motion semi-circle corresponds to
an upper extremity impairment located on one of the outer circles on the pie chart. For rating purposes,
once the degree of range of motion is located on the “V” semi-circle, the degree of the impairment is
determined by moving out to the appropriate semi-circle. Impairment due to loss of flexion is on IF.
Impairment due to loss of extension is on IE. Impairment due to ankylosis is on IA.
Example 1.
Applicant can flex his shoulder to 180 degrees and extend to 50 degrees. There is no loss of
range of motion, and obviously no impairment. But to illustrate the methodology with which we
are concerned with, we start with flexion. First we note 180 degrees of flexion range of motion on
semi-circle V. Then we move out to semi-circle IF, which indicates zero percent impairment. Next,
we note 50 degrees of extension range of motion on semi-circle V. Then we move out to semi-
circle IE, which indicates zero percent impairment. Addition of these two zeros is obviously zero,
and there is no upper extremity impairment for shoulder flexion and extension. Since this does
not involve ankylosis (e.g., a frozen shoulder), it is not factored in.
Example 2.
Applicant can flex his shoulder joint only to 150 degrees and extend to only 25 degrees. First, we
note 150 degrees of flexion range of motion on semi-circle V. Then we move out to semi-circle IF,
which indicates two percent upper extremity impairment. Next, we note 25 degrees of extension
range of motion on semi-circle V. Then we move out to semi-circle IE, which indicates another
two percent upper extremity impairment. (Technically, the extension impairment is at a half-way
point of 1.5 percent, which is rounded up to the next whole number, i.e., 2.0 percent.) Add the IF
of two percent to the IE of two percent, and the total is four percent upper extremity impairment.
Again, since this is not a condition of ankylosis, it is not factored in. Remember, if there is a loss
of range of motion in a single joint in multiple ranges, in this case, flexion and extension, the
upper extremity impairment ratings for each range of motion is added and not combined.
Example 3.
Applicant has an ankylosis condition in which the shoulder is frozen at 50 degrees of flexion. For
ankylosis conditions, we note the position where the shoulder is frozen. In this case, we note 50
degrees of flexion on semi-circle V. Then we move out to semi-circle IA, which indicates 17
percent upper extremity impairment.
The asterisks for “positions of function” mean that even if the joint is severely compromised for range of
motion, but are within the ranges of motion from 20 to 40 degrees for flexion, the person can still use the
shoulder joint for most functions even though there are ratable impairments due to decreased ranges of
motion. In other words, if the shoulder is frozen in ankylosis between 20 degrees and 40 degrees of flexion,
the IA percent is 15 percent upper extremity impairment, and the shoulder is still considered functional for
most activities of daily living.
Remember, the Figure 16-40 pie chart applies only to flexion and extension measurements. The physician
also needs to measure abduction, adduction, internal rotation, and external rotation with different pie charts
in AMA Guides Chapter 16. Any impairments due to loss of range of motion within the same joint, in this
example, the shoulder, are to be added and not combined.
Page 6 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
COMMON MISTAKE:
While reading a medical report, you have to make sure physicians measure all ratable ranges of
motion and use the proper pie charts and the correct arrays of upper extremity impairments due
to flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and internal and external rotation for shoulder injuries.
The same concept applies for any other joint where range of motion impairments are determined
by pie charts, i.e., for thumbs, fingers, hands, wrists, and elbows.
[3] Peripheral Nerve Disorders
AMA Guides Chapter 16 has a section on page 480 called Impairment of Upper Extremities Due to Peripheral
Nerve Disorders that refer to sensory (afferent) deficits or pain and to motor (efferent) deficits such as atrophy
and power loss. Table 16-10 on page 482 has a sensory deficit or pain grading system 0 to 5 in severity with 0
being no functional use. Table 16-11 on page 484 covers motor and muscle power deficits also on a 0 to 5
grading scale with a grade 5 being normal motor strength against gravity and grade 0 being no contractility of
the muscle. As indicated in this guidebook, most of our cases fall within Grade 4 sensory and/or motor deficit
range and in more serious injury cases, we will see Grade 3. Only in cases where there is confirmed direct
nerve damage will you see Grades 2, 1, or 0.
Remember, nerves have three functions—sensory (including pain), motor, and autonomic (like when you touch
a hot stove you involuntarily jerk your hand away). When you rate a peripheral nerve condition, you are only
looking at sensory, motor, or both. It is possible that only a sensory deficit exists without any motor deficit.
However, usually if there is a motor deficit, there is also a sensory deficit.
Table 16-15 on page 492 gives you the maximum upper extremity impairment for sensory and motor and 100%
combined motor and sensory for each nerve that applies to the upper extremity. Of particular concern to us in
our workers’ compensation cases is the median nerve below the mid-forearm (e.g., at the wrist level) for carpal
tunnel syndrome cases and the ulnar nerve above the mid-forearm for cubital tunnel syndrome and
epicondylitis cases. The maximum value of the median nerve at the wrist for sensory is 39% UE impairment
and 10% UE impairment for motor deficits. The maximum value of the ulnar nerve at the elbow for sensory is
7% UE impairment and 46% UE impairment for motor deficits. Remember, use Table 16-10 on page 455 to
grade sensory deficits or pain and Table 16-11 on page 484 to grade motor deficits.
Most of our typical carpal tunnel, cubital tunnel, or medial epicondylitis cases involve a Grade 4 (25%)
sensory/pain deficit and/or a Grade 4 (25%) motor deficit all of which are a 25% loss of the maximum upper
extremity (UE) value for each nerve. In real life, outside the workers’ compensation universe, carpal tunnel
release surgeries mostly result in Grade 5 sensory and motor “ratings” with no ratable permanent impairment.
The most common complaint patients who have had carpal tunnel release surgery complain of weakness of
grip and fatigue with repetitive gripping and grasping activities.
Occasionally an evaluating or treating physician will assign a Grade 3 sensory/pain or motor deficit rating
(which are 26% to 60% deficit) for each nerve. Those types of cases usually involve multiple unsuccessful
surgeries to the wrist or elbow, scar tissue formation, or severe diabetic polyneuropathies. We have seen
Grade 3 sensory and motor deficit median nerve status post carpal tunnel surgeries where there is thenar or
hypothenar atrophy (the meaty areas on the palm near the thumb and the area below the pinky to the wrist). On
the other hand, it is possible to have a Grade 5 motor with no impairment and a Grade 4 sensory impairment
with a 10% UE impairment rating from a successful or unsuccessful carpal tunnel surgical result. In other
words, the sensory and motor Grades at the time of MMI can be a moving target on the same patient. This is
why the AMA Guides recommend MMI ratings to occur one-year post surgery, which in California is silly and
expensive since who wants to pay temporary total disability benefits for a year when the usual recovery time for
a carpal tunnel release is six to eight weeks?
You need to become familiar with the terminology in Chapter 16 concerning the “ulnar palmer” side of things
and the “radial palmer” side of things. The radius is the bone in your forearm that runs from the base of the
thumb to the elbow. The ulna is the bone that runs from the base of hand at the pinky finger to the elbow and is
the larger bone of the two in the forearm. The ulnar palmer area referred to in Table 16-15 on page 492 refers
Page 7 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
to the palm of the hand facing the ulnar side of the hand or fingers. The radial palmer area refers to the side of
the hand or finger that is on the palm side of the hand facing the radial side of the hand/wrist.
[4] Digital and Hand Impairments
[a] In General
There are special rules that govern impairments of the digits, the thumb, and the hand. For example, the
total hand impairment rating is determined by adding the hand impairment contributed by each digit,
especially in amputation cases that also involve other impairments of the same upper extremity. See AMA
Guides, Chapter 16, Section 16.1d and Table 16-4 on page 440.
[b] Loss of Range of Motion
Sensory loss due to digital nerve impairments are found in Tables 16-5 through 16-7, pages 447–448, and
are based upon two-point discrimination testing and considerations of touch, pinprick, pressure, and
vibratory stimuli. Range of motion deficits for the fingers and thumb are in AMA Guides, Chapter 16,
Section 16.4, page 450. Again, any impairment from loss of range of motion within a joint are added for that
joint. If a joint is in ankylosis in one unit of motion (two extremes of motion in one plane), then that ankylosis
amount is added to the other impaired range of motion ratings for that joint. You need to use the pie charts
for the range of motion for fingers, thumb, wrist, elbow, and shoulder to follow this.
THE THUMB
The range of motion ratings for the thumb are in AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Section 16.4d, page 454. The
thumb has three joints: IP (interphalangeal); MP (metacarpophalangeal); and CMC (carpometacarpal). You
have five ranges of motion for the three thumb joints. The IP and MP joints each have flexion and
extension. The CMC joint has adduction, radial abduction, and opposition. The CMC joint is 75% relative
value to the whole thumb. The ability to perform opposition with the CMC joint is 45% relative value of the
entire thumb. See AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Figures 16-11, 16-14, 16-18, and 16-19, plus the pie charts
Figures 16-12 and 16-15, and Tables 16-8a, 16-8b, and 16-9, all of which are located on pages 455–460.
These charts, tables, and figures are very complicated, but you should learn them in complicated upper
extremity cases that involve finger and thumb injuries. Impairments in range of motion of the thumb are
added, even if the impairments come from different thumb joints.
THE FINGERS
Finger range of motion impairments are handled the same way as the thumb with three functional units of
motion: DIP (distal interphalangeal); PIP (proximal interphalangeal); and MP (metacarpophalangeal). See
Figures 16-20, 16-22, and 16-24 for range of motion for each, and Figures 16-21, 16-23, and 16-25 for DIP,
PIP, and MP pie charts, respectively (see pages 500–503). The normal ranges of motion for each finger
joint are listed on the extremes in the V portion of each pie chart.
THE WRIST
The range of motion for the wrist is very easy to understand and rate for impairment. Wrist flexion and
extension normally is 60 degrees. See AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Figure 16-26, page 466, and the pie chart
for flexion and extension on page 467. For radial deviation and ulnar deviation, normal is 20 degrees for
radial deviation and 30 degrees for ulnar deviation. If you get confused about which direction is which,
remember the ulnar side of the hand is the pinky side and the radial side is the thumb side. You can also
see the diagram in Figure 16-29 on page 468. The pie chart for radial and ulnar deviation is Figure 16-31,
page 469. To provide an easy reference, here are the normal ranges of motion for the wrist:
THE ELBOW
The elbow joint accounts for 70% of the upper extremity function. The elbow has flexion and extension plus
pronation and supination. Again, any impairments from these four different ranges of motion are added.
See AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Figure 16-32, page 471, and the pie chart for flexion and extension, Figure
16-34, page 472. For pronation and supination, see Figure 16-35, page 473, and the pie chart, Figure 16-
37, page 474. You can test your own pronation and supination by starting at 0 degrees neutral with your
Page 8 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
“thumbs up.” Then turn your forearm to the right or left and measure the angle. The normal ranges of
motion of the elbow are as follows:
THE SHOULDER
The shoulder joint accounts for 60% of the upper extremity function. There is flexion, extension, abduction,
adduction, internal rotation, and external rotation. Diagrams that explain by illustration each of the ranges of
motion and the corresponding pie charts can be found in AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Figure 16-38, page 475
(flexion and extension), Figure 16-40, page 476, pie chart for flexion and extension, Figure 16-41, page 477
(abduction and adduction), Figure 16-43, page 477, pie chart for abduction and adduction, Figure 16-44,
page 478 (external and internal rotation), and Figure 16-46, page 479, pie chart for external and internal
rotation.
Abduction is raising your arm stretched from your side outwards and above your head. Adduction is moving
your arm extended from in front of your body to as far to the opposite side as you can. External and internal
rotation of the shoulder joint is tested by having you extend your elbow away from your body and level with
your shoulder. Then you rotate the shoulder raising your forearm, like you were swearing yourself in as a
witness, and lowering the forearm so that your hand is parallel to your waist. The normal ranges of motion
for the shoulder joint are as follows:
Since there is significant dispute over how to rate shoulder and other upper extremity injuries, a discussion
on the relationship between loss of motion of a joint and other disorders is set forth below.
[5] Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
There is a section in the AMA Guides where carpal tunnel syndrome is discussed, including the notion that in
5% of true carpal tunnel syndrome cases, the electro-diagnostic testing is negative. See AMA Guides, Chapter
16, Section 16.5d, page 495. The authors of the AMA Guides opine that there are three possible outcomes
from carpal tunnel surgery if someone still complains of pain, paresthesias, and/or difficulties in performing
certain activities:
1. There is positive clinical findings of median nerve dysfunction and abnormal EMG/NCV post surgically,
which need to be evaluated based upon sensory/pain and motor deficits, as indicated in Table 16-10,
page 482, Table 16-11, page 484, and Table 16-15, page 492; or
2. There is normal sensibility and motor strength, but with abnormal EMG/NCV of thenar muscles and an
impairment rating only up to 5% UE can be justified; or
3. There is normal sensibility and motor strength with normal EMG/NCV, and there is no basis for an
impairment rating.
Most physicians in the California workers’ compensation community do not follow this strict protocol while
determining permanent impairment from a carpal tunnel surgery. Liberal construction probably mandates the
first method and giving the applicant the benefit of the doubt if he or she still has symptoms post surgically. This
suggested approach does not take into account the additional expense of repeat EMG/NCV testing, along with
a prolonged temporary total disability period until the applicant is declared MMI after an “optimal recovery
period,” which is one year in other states that use a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides.
COMMON MISTAKE:
In real medicine, people recover from carpal tunnel surgery in 6 weeks, and 85% have no residual
signs, symptoms, or complaints except for some grip loss or weakness with repetitive gross
manipulation. But the reality is that many injured workers return to work that involve extensive
repetitive hand use and this puts additional stress of the wrist including the reconstructed or missing
carpal ligament that was operated on. When counsel has a carpal tunnel syndrome case, make sure
the evaluating and treating physicians use Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15 correctly, especially since
pain can be considered and graded under Table 16-10 for “sensory loss or pain.” Look for clinical
testing such as the Tinel’s sign, Phalen’s test, and hand flick test. Believe it or not, the hand flick test is
a more accurate test for carpal tunnel syndrome than either electro-diagnostic studies or the Tinel’s
Page 9 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
and Phalen’s tests. People who have severe symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome flick their hands
(like shaking water off of them) to relieve the symptoms. All an examining physician needs to do is ask
a patient what he or she does when the symptoms are at their worse. If they start flicking their wrist,
that is a clinically reliable positive diagnostic sign of carpal tunnel syndrome. Also bear in mind, as
stated in this text, that electro-diagnostic testing is sometimes not accurate and can result in false
negative or false positive findings. There are many people who have a very positive EMG/NCV
showing sensory deficits for the median nerve and there are no symptoms. Conversely, there are many
negative EMG/NCV studies in cases where a patient has severe carpal tunnel syndrome (confirmed by
surgical correction). Remember, carpal tunnel syndrome is a nerve irritation phenomenon that is
caused by compression of the median nerve by a narrow carpal canal. This can be caused by an
inflamed nerve, scar tissue, or narrow canal, and a variety of other causes.
However, a careful reading of Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15 result in a different way of rating carpal tunnel
syndrome cases when the injured worker still has significant limitation of function. This alternative rating method
actually uses these tables as intended but with an attorney’s careful scrutiny of the language used by the
authors of the AMA Guides within these tables. This is not an alternative rating method under Guzman III at
all—it is a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides as intended originally prior to current case law.
Table 16-10 on page 482 is titled, “Determining Impairment of the Upper Extremity Due to Sensory Deficits or
Pain Resulting From Peripheral Nerve Disorders.” Notice that the word “or” separates the terms sensory deficits
from the word “pain.” Does this imply that this table can be used if the impairment is caused by a peripheral
nerve problem that causes a “sensory deficit” or if it causes “pain?” Probably so. This table is intended to
measure sensory deficits and pain comes from the sensory function of a nerve.
If you look at the actual grading criteria under Table 16-10, each grade from Grade 0 to Grade 5 uses sensory
deficit OR pain as selection criteria for a rating. For example, a Grade 3, 26–60% sensory deficit states:
“Distorted superficial tactile sensibility (diminished light touch and two-point discrimination), with some abnormal
sensations OR slight pain, that interferes with some activities.” Does this mean that a physician should assign a
26–60% Grade to the maximum sensory value of the median or ulnar nerve if the peripheral nerve injury still
causes “slight pain that interferes with some activities?” Arguably, if a person is status post carpal tunnel
release surgery and the patient still has significant limitation of function with the injured wrist and remains
severely limited in the ability to type on a keyboard or write, that person should be able to obtain a 23% upper
extremity rating (a 14% WPI) just for the sensory nerve impairment (calculated by multiplying 60% times the
maximum sensory value of the median nerve of 39% UE from Table 16-15 on page 492). Loss of strength
testing under Table 16-11 does not refer to pain but we know in the “Other Disorders” section of the AMA
Guides, muscle strength deficits cannot be used to measure impairment if the patient is not using maximum
force due to decreased motion, painful conditions, deformities or loss of a part. See page 508 of the AMA
Guides. Remember that carpal tunnel syndrome usually involves pain, which is a sensory function as opposed
to grip loss, which is a motor function. In many cases, there are both sensory and motor deficits, even after
successful carpal tunnel release surgery.
There is an informative discussion on page 493 of the AMA Guides about the efficacy and limitations of using
electro-diagnostic testing to determine peripheral upper extremity impairments. Diagnosis of nerve entrapment
is based on the patient’s history and symptoms, objective clinical signs and findings by a physician’s physical
examination, and EMG/NCV studies. The Guides instruct us that the patient’s history should include
descriptions of the patient’s work activities, ADLs, factors that alleviate or aggravate symptoms, medical
conditions (like diabetes), past surgical procedures, or trauma. The authors state as follows:
The entrapment of a major peripheral nerve or one of its branches is reflected by a disturbance of a
specific motor, sensory, or autonomic function. Functionally, the symptoms may vary from slight
paresthesia, motor weakness, or both to complete sensibility loss, muscle paralysis, or both. The severity
of the nerve damage and symptoms depends on the duration, magnitude, and type of compression as well
as on the microanatomy of the nerve involved.
In describing the physical examination, the authors mandate examination of “sensibility alterations, muscle
power, range of motion, grip strength, and tendon reflexes.” Recommended testing include Phalen’s or reverse
Page 10 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
Phalen’s, Tinel’s, elbow flexion among other standard physical examination testing. In fact, the authors
recommend Tinel’s and Phalen’s testing after a nerve decompression surgery such as a carpal tunnel release,
ulnar nerve transposition, or other peripheral nerve decompression surgery. As to EMG/NCV testing, the
authors state:
A fundamental point is that, regardless of the cause of nerve damage, the electro-diagnostic studies
essentially can detect only two types of pathophysiology of the peripheral nerve system fibers: (1) axon
loss … which is manifested as conduction failure, and (2) focal demyelination … which can cause either
conduction slowing or conduction block, depending on the severity of the process. The severity of
conduction slowing has no correlation with the severity of clinical symptoms, such as weakness or static
large fiber sensory loss. If these are present, substantial amounts of either conduction block, axon loss, or
a combination of both must be present.” [Italics in original text].
The AMA Guides indicate on page 493 further instructions and guidance on the significance of EMG/NCV
studies:
Only individuals with an objectively verifiable diagnosis should qualify for a permanent impairment rating.
The diagnosis is made not only on believable symptoms but, more important, on the presence of positive
clinical findings and loss of function. The diagnosis should be documented by electromyography as well as
sensory and motor nerve conduction studies. However, it is critical to understand that there is no
correlation between the severity of conduction delay on nerve conduction velocity testing and the severity
of either symptoms or, more important, impairment rating. The surgical findings of evidence of nerve
compression and reactive hyperemia upon nerve release help confirm the diagnosis. [Italics in original
text].
If an injured worker has peripheral nerve entrapment release surgery (usually the median or ulnar nerve, and
rarely the radial nerve in the upper extremity; or the peroneal nerve in the lower extremity), the AMA Guides
recommend that “Postoperatively a sufficient amount of time for optimal physiologic recovery and rehabilitation
should elapse before an individual qualifies for permanent impairment rating should there be residual symptoms
or clinical findings … Age is not a prognostic factor. Sensory function usually returns before motor function …
During the recovery time, individuals can experience some of the preoperative symptoms. An advancing Tinel’s
sign can be monitored and is a good prognostic sign.” So for a routine carpal tunnel release of the median
nerve, recovery time is between six and nine months, and up to two years for nerve releases that are higher up
on the upper extremity from the wrist.
[6] Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
Table 16-16 on page 496 lists the diagnostic criteria for complex regional pain syndrome types 1 and 2.
However, see the discussion in AMA Guides Chapter 13 (central and peripheral nervous system) of CRPS on
page 343. See also Chapter 4 of this guidebook for a detailed discussion of CRPS and how the diagnostic
criteria for that medical condition has changed since the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides was published in 2000.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Do not allow any physician to refer to any discussion about CRPS in Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides
because all of the diagnostic criteria listed there are obsolete and no longer used in present day
medicine. The authors in Chapter 16 used the research based diagnostic criteria for CRPS which only
captures the most severe cases, probably less than 5% of all confirmed cases of CRPS. The present
diagnostic criteria for CRPS uses a clinical medicine diagnostic criteria that is accepted by the
International Association of the Study of Pain and it is symptom specific. Counsel should refer to
Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides in the chronic pain sections for upper and lower extremities.
[7] Vascular Disorders
Page 11 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Section 16.6, pages 497 and 498, and Table 16-17, page 498, cover upper extremity
impairments due to vascular disorders. This section is confusing at first because vascular disorders that affect
the upper or lower extremities are covered in AMA Guides, Chapter 4, Section 4.3, pages 73–78. However, the
authors of Chapter 16 indicate that Table 16-17 applies when there is vascular damage or Raynaud’s
phenomenon with obstructive physiology confirmed by Doppler and other studies. You should always refer to
Table 16-17 if you are dealing with an amputation involving the upper extremity, because any rating here is
combined with a normal upper extremity rating from the earlier sections in Chapter 16, with a maximum for the
entire upper extremity of 60% WPI.
[8] “Other Disorders”
[a] In General
AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Section 16.7, pages 498–507, covers upper extremity impairments that are “due
to other disorders.” The authors of the AMA Guides, on page 499, caution the evaluator that: “The criteria
described in this section should be used only when the other criteria have not adequately encompassed the
extent of impairments.” The following “other disorders of the upper extremities” are included in these
sections of the AMA Guides: Bone and Joint Disorders, (Section 16.7a, page 499); Resection or Implant
Arthroplasty (Section 16.7b, page 505); Musculotendinous disorders (Section 16.7c, page 506); Tendonitis
(Section 16.7d, page 507); and Loss of Strength (Section 16.8, page 507).
The impairment ratings for these other disorders are rated according to severity according to Tables 16-19
through 16-30, page 500–507, and then multiplied by the maximum unit value from Table 16-18 on page
499 to determine an ultimate UE or WPI rating. Table 16-18 lists units and joints of the shoulder, elbow,
wrist, entire hand, thumb, index and middle fingers, and ring and little fingers. If more than one joint in a
specific digit is affected due to “other disorders,” then the impairment rating for those joints are added, if
there is a normal range of motion within those joints, or combined, if the joints do not have a normal range
of motion.
[b] Bone and Joint Deformities
For bone and joint deformities, there are specific rules concerning disorders concerning digits, wrists, and
elbows. Those disorders covered here include “joint translocations,” such as lateral deviation, digit
rotational deformity, subluxation, or dislocation in any combination. Joint swelling, which can be a
component of arthritis as are some of the other disorders listed in these sections, can be rated only when
no other findings are present. See AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Table 16-19 and text, page 500. Tables 16-19
through 16-23 apply to fingers and the thumb. Table 16-24, page 502, applies to wrist and elbow joint
mediolateral deviation (also known as a varus and valgus deformity). Table 16-25, page 503, applies to
upper extremity impairments due to carpal instability in the wrist joint (commonly caused by a fracture,
arthritis, or torn ligament), which includes scapholunate disassociation and ulnar translocation. MRIs,
arthroscopy, or X-rays will indicate most of these conditions. Shoulder joint instability is discussed in AMA
Guides, Chapter 16, pages 503–505, including Table 16-26, page 505, which describes upper extremity
impairments due to symptomatic subluxating or dislocating humeral head. The UE rating due to shoulder
joint instability can be combined with any loss of range of motion from AMA Guides, Chapter 16, pages
475–479.
Many evaluating physicians like to use Table 16-25 upper extremity impairment due to carpal instability
patterns as an alternative WPI rating method to the standard carpal tunnel syndrome evaluations for
sensory and motor deficits described above. Table 16-25 allows for an impairment rating of up to 24% UE
which is 14% WPI. There have been a number of cases involving dislocation of the shoulder that involves
the humeral head. The issue of the use of Table 16-26 on page 505 is whether the diagnosis alone justifies
the impairment rating since once a shoulder dislocates, there is a high incidence of recurrence, even when
there is surgery to repair the dislocation. There is nothing in the text that references Table 16-26 that tells
us that the WPI ratings for a dislocated shoulder is to be determined as a diagnosis based impairment
rating or after treatment.
Page 12 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
[c] Resection Arthroplasty
For resection arthroplasty, ratings depend upon whether there is any ankylosis of the joint and whether the
joint repair or replacement has failed. Any loss of range of motion is combined with the ratings due to joint
reconstruction or replacement. Joint replacement or resection impairments are listed in AMA Guides, Table
16-27, page 506, and are listed as upper extremity impairments. However, compare Table 16-27 with Table
16-18 where the authors of the AMA Guides indicate that the maximum value of the AC joint is 15% WPI
but a distal clavicle resection arthroplasty is a 10% UE impairment (6% WPI). In any distal clavicle resection
arthroplasty, the AC joint is surgically removed and there is no longer an AC joint—scar tissue fills in the
joint space. So which rating applies depends on how the evaluating physician views these two conflicting
analyses of the AC shoulder joint. Bear in mind that a distal clavicle resection arthroplasty, an AC joint
resection, and a Mumford procedure are all the same thing.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many physicians forget that a Mumford Procedure results in a minimum of a 6% WPI rating under
Table 16-27 or 15% WPI under Table 16-18 (this is one of 300 errors in the AMA Guides)
because the reference to the surgery is in operative reports and not captured at the time of an
MMI examination. Counsel must always read operative reports to see if there is anything that is
ratable simply due to a type of surgery performed and regardless of outcome.
Table 16-27 also refers to a carpal-metacarpal arthroplasty which is removal of the first joint below the
thumb, where the thumb connects to the first bone in the wrist—the trapezium. A “CMC arthroplasty” occurs
when the joint deteriorates and becomes extremely painful to perform pinching activities. Nurses who assist
in surgeries, gastro-intestinal procedures using scopes; flight attendants who use the metal beverage carts
on airplanes seem to commonly need a CMC arthroplasty towards the end of their careers.
On page 505 of the AMA Guides, under Section 16.7b, resection arthroplasty is discussed and includes the
instruction “In the presence of decreased motion, motion impairments are derived separately and combined
with the arthroplasty impairment …. A severe symptomatic failure of an implant arthroplasty procedure (e.g.
symptomatic breakage or subluxation of the device) is given 100% of the joint value as listed in Table 16-
18.” [Italics in original text]. So you can rate loss of motion and combine that rating with the rating for the
arthroplasty. This is especially important and applicable to shoulder injury cases since there is always a
loss of motion with any kind of shoulder replacement surgery. What is interesting about the language
quoted above is that if a person has a “fair” or “poor” result of an upper extremity joint arthroplasty (listed on
Table 16-27), hypothetically a physician could rate the arthroplasty as a percentage of the value of the joint
using Table 16-18 at less than 100% of that value.
One last note about cases that result in a resection arthroplasty. Many physicians miss this ratable
condition when evaluating a patient at MMI status. A resection arthroplasty is ratable regardless of the
outcome of surgery, except as stated in the previous paragraph. The point is that many treating and
evaluating physicians fail to include a rating for the arthroplasty even though it is separately ratable from
other ratable factors. The Disability Evaluation Unit (DEU) raters constantly complain that physicians fail to
read their own operative reports that show ratable impairment just based on a surgical procedure that is
automatically ratable.
[d] Constrictive Tenosynovitis (Trigger Fingers)
Believe it or not, there are tables and a section in the AMA Guides that independently cover trigger fingers,
also known as “constrictive tenosynovitis,” which is listed in Table 16-29, page 507, the result of which is
multiplied times the maximum joint value in Table 16-18, page 499. AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Section
16.7d, Tendonitis, page 507, suggests that the only ratable kind of tendonitis is when there is surgery, and
usually there is a permanent grip strength loss. If so, use Tables 16-31 through 16-34, page 509, for grip
Page 13 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
and pinch strength normal and loss of grip and pinch abilities. Note that trigger fingers are associated at
times with severe carpal tunnel syndrome or recurrent carpal tunnel syndrome.
[e] Muscle Strength Loss
For muscle strength loss, see AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Section 16.8, pages 507–511. There are
cautionary notes by the authors in using muscle strength loss in terms of reliability and consistency, but the
authors do not preclude the use of this method to determine impairments. Counsel is advised to read the
specific cautionary notes and instructions in AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Section 16.8, pages 507–508,
especially the suggestion that there should be multiple measurements over time up to and including a year
after the time of surgery or injury.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Do not assume a physician cannot rate muscle strength loss for the hands/writs (grip loss),
elbows, or shoulders. Loss of strength is one of the most common results of surgical correction of
an upper extremity. In real life, any shoulder surgery will result in some loss of motion and loss of
strength in some (but rarely all) of the six ranges of motion and strength measurements.
Remember, the shoulder joint is all soft tissue consisting of tendons, muscles, and the humeral
head of the upper arm. Surgical correction of pathology causes permanent alteration of the
shoulder morphology, no matter how good a result from surgery occurs. Grip loss is a viable WPI
rating if the underlying pathology is identified, but there have to be significant objective medical
findings to support the rating.
Measurements of grip and pinch only test the muscle groups of the structures in the hand, wrist, or forearm.
See Tables 16-31 through 16-34, page 509. Measurements for muscle strength loss of the elbow and
shoulder are listed in Table 16-35, page 510, and are added for each range of motion graded weakness.
Table 16-35 can be used, for example, in a shoulder rotator cuff tear case when after surgical repair, there
is normal range of motion, but weakness in flexion and abduction against gravity with some resistance. See
AMA Guides, Example 16-72, page 511. For a discussion about muscle strength deficits as a stand-alone
rating in upper and lower extremity cases, see Ch. 4, § 4.14, of this guidebook on developing the record to
obtain an accurate rating.
If a physician rates grip loss, there has to be a good reason to use that method. In general, for carpal tunnel
syndrome, use of grip loss alone as a rating method is not acceptable unless there are documented
reasons why that method is more accurate than the standard methods described above in this guidebook
and on page 495 of the AMA Guides. However, use of grip loss as a stand-alone rating method has gained
acceptance as a strict rating method if there is more than one impairment occurring that directly affects grip
strength and stamina. For example, if a person has DeQuervain’s tenosynovitis (inflammation of the tendon
along the back of the thumb), carpal tunnel syndrome with a trigger finger, a grip loss rating may be the
most accurate rating since there are different patho-mechanical reasons for the grip loss.
Many physicians are utilizing both loss of motion ratings of the shoulder and elbow along with muscle
weakness under Table 16-35. Counsel should learn and understand how Table 16-35 is used by physicians
in order to be prepared to depose a physician in a given case. While we cannot include Table 16-35 in this
guidebook due to copyright considerations, a written description of how to read Table 16-35 is appropriate
here. In order to fully understand its use, you should have a copy of Table 16-35 handy with this
explanation. As with many of the Tables in the AMA Guides, the authors do not explain to readers in the
text on page 510, where Table 16-35 is located, how to apply it using layman’s terms.
The first column is called “Joint Relative Value” and refers to each of the six motions the shoulder joint has
and the four motions the elbow has.
The column called “Unit of Motion Relative Value” refers to the maximum Upper Extremity (UE) rating for
each range of motion of the shoulder and elbow joints for muscle strength loss or weakness. So the
maximum joint relative value for shoulder flexion strength is 24% UE. The shoulder has six ranges of
Page 14 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
motion and, therefore, six muscle strength measurements; the elbow has four ranges of motion with four
muscle strength measurements.
The “Strength Deficit” percentages are based on the same grading system of motor strength loss that are in
Table 16-11, which is intended for neurologically based muscle strength loss in cases like carpal tunnel
syndrome or ulnar nerve entrapment cases. The Strength Deficit columns only account for Grades 5, 4, and
3 strength deficits, using the same motor loss definitions used in Table 16-11: Grade 5 is normal strength;
Grade 4 is good; Grade 3 is fair; Grade 2 is poor; Grade 1 is trace; and Grade 0 is no muscle contraction.
The authors state on page 510:
In the absence of peripheral nerve involvement, most weaknesses usually fall in the grade 4 category:
“complete active range of motion against gravity with some resistance.” Few injuries result in a more
profound weakness, such as a grade 3 category: “complete range active range of motion against
gravity only without resistance.” Muscle strength graded 3 or lower is usually accompanied by other
clinical findings such as atrophy. Because the functional units of motion of each joint were assigned on
a 100% scale, the upper extremity impairment values derived for weakness of each unit of motion are
added directly together. (emphasis in original)
The terminology complete active range of motion against gravity with some resistance means that the
injured worker can move his or her elbow or shoulder in the motion indicated (e.g., flexion, extension, etc.)
“against gravity” and when the physician provides resistance against each tested motion. The term
complete active range of motion against gravity only, without resistance means that the injured worker
cannot move a specific motion while the physician provides resistance to that motion, but can move a
specific motion without resistance—he or she can raise his arm “against gravity” but cannot hold it in place
when the physician applies resistance against the motion.
What this means is that the authors only show Grades 4 and 3 in the Strength Deficit columns. So if a
person has a Grade 4 shoulder flexion strength loss, the physician would have to assign a 5% to 25%
Strength Deficit and then multiply it times the maximum value of the joint motion in the second to left
column of Table 16-35. If there is a 25% Strength Deficit for shoulder flexion, then the UE rating would be
24 × 25% or 6% UE. The 6% UE is under the Strength Deficit column below “5%–25% under the range ‘1–
6’ ” If there was a Grade 3, 50% strength deficit for shoulder flexion, there would be a 12% UE rating for
that loss of strength (50% of 24 from the left column “Joint Relative Value”).
If the injured worker has a 25% Strength Deficit for shoulder flexion and 25% Strength Deficit for shoulder
extension, based on the italicized instructions in the text, quoted above, you would add the UE ratings for
flexion (24 × 25% = 6% UE impairment) and extension (6 × 25% = 2% UE impairment), which would equal
8% UE or 5% WPI using Table 16-3 converting upper extremity to whole person.
The numbers within the two columns to the right in Table 16-35 form the range of final UE ratings for
Grades 4 and 3 for each shoulder and elbow joint motion.
The footnote at the bottom of Table 16-35 states: “Use clinical judgment to select the appropriate
percentage from the range of values shown for each severity grade.” This refers the physician to use the
bold printed range of percentage loss of strength for each joint motion, utilizing the grading system
described above and the corresponding range of upper extremity impairment within the table along each
joint motion. In other words, the table does the math for the physician.
As a general result of any kind of shoulder surgery, including rotator cuff repairs, labral tear repairs, or an
AC joint resection arthroplasty, the most common affected ranges of motion are internal rotation, external
rotation, and abduction. In addition, some people complain about having difficulty lifting objects away from
the body with arms extended as a result of shoulder surgery. So, loss of range of motion ratings along with
muscle strength deficits under Table 16-35 may be the most accurate strict rating method provided that the
instructions in the text are closely followed and justified.
[9] Combining Upper Extremity Ratings for the Same Part of Body
We have seen many cases in which physicians are struggling with rating upper extremity injuries using the
AMA Guides. The variations in ratings for the same impairment are due to the confusing language in the text of
Page 15 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
the AMA Guides and different interpretations of them by physicians. The resolution of disputed interpretations
of the tables, figures and text of the AMA Guides will have to be resolved by the WCAB and appellate courts,
on a case by case basis. We continue to see cases where an AME examines an Applicant, writes a report, has
his or her deposition taken and the parties still need to go to trial in the case because of a dispute over how the
AME’s conclusions should be rated.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many physicians do not know that Table 16-18 can be used as an elegant alternative rating method for
an upper extremity joint dysfunction. Table 16-18 has the maximum upper extremity and WPI ratings
for each joint. Any physician can be asked by counsel what percentage loss of function does (fill in the
affected upper extremity joint) have?
Table 16-18 on page 499 is very useful because it lists the maximum possible upper extremity impairments for
fingers, hand, thumb, wrist, elbow, and shoulder and converts them from upper extremity impairment to whole
person impairment. However, the use of Table 16-18 by evaluating and treating physicians is controversial. In
many cases involving the shoulder and elbow, physicians are issuing opinions that impairment ratings derived
from loss of range of motion do not adequately describe an injured worker’s overall impairment to the upper
extremity. As a result, physicians are combining the loss of motion impairment rating with a rating from “Other
Disorders” in Section 16.7 of the AMA Guides and utilizing Table 16-18 as a basis to do so.
For example, in a case that involves a through and through torn rotator cuff of the shoulder, usually there will be
some measurable loss of motion even with a good result of a surgical repair. More often than not, a person will
experience permanent loss of strength in the shoulder from such an injury and surgery. However, impairment
ratings for loss of strength under “Other Disorders” may not be the most appropriate way to measure
permanent impairment because of some doubt about either the reliability of the measurements of loss of
strength or because of some doubt about the permanency of the loss of strength over time. Instead, the
physician will utilize Table 16-18 and combine the loss of motion of the shoulder joint with a percentage loss of
use of the affected joint.
In the example here, the glenohumeral joint is supported by the rotator cuff and a tear of the rotator cuff
compromises the support of that joint. Some AME and other physicians are rating that loss of support as a
percentage loss of use or function of the glenohumeral joint utilizing Table 16-18 by concluding the maximum
impairment value of that joint is a 60% upper extremity impairment rating or 36% WPI rating and the patient has
lost 10%, 25% or whatever percent of the total use or function of that joint resulting in additional impairment that
can be combined with the loss of motion rating. So a 25% loss of use or function of the glenohumeral joint is a
9% WPI rating (25% of the total value of the joint which is 60% maximum upper extremity value which equals
15% upper extremity impairment, which is a 9% WPI rating).
Another example is when there is a resection arthroplasty of the AC joint of the shoulder (acromioclavicular
joint). The maximum upper extremity impairment value of the AC joint from Table 16-18 is 25% upper extremity
impairment or 15% WPI. So if a person has damage to that joint, then the physician tells us what percentage
loss of use of that joint exists using Table 16-18 as a basis.
There are some cautionary notes for counsel to be aware of if a physician utilizes this method of analysis. First
of all, the text in Section 16.7 mandate that if a physician uses Table 16-18, there must be a ratable condition
existing under “Other Disorders” in order to use this method and Table 16-18. There has to be a bone or joint
deformity (Section 16.7a), resection or implant arthroplasty (Section 16.7b), musculotendinous disorders
(Section 16.7c), tendonitis (Section 16.7d), or loss of strength (Section 16.8). The authors of Chapter 16 go on
to say on page 498 of the AMA Guides:
The severity of these disorders are rated separately according to Tables 16-19 through 16-30 and then
multiplied by the relative maximum value of the unit involved as specified in Table 16-18. Appropriate
impairment percentages are combined with other impairment percentages by means of the Combined
Values Chart …
Page 16 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
Actually, this instruction is not entirely accurate. For example, for resection arthroplasty of a joint, the rating is
taken directly from Table 16-27 and there is no need to multiply a percentage loss times the maximum unit
value using Table 16-18, although both methods have been used in the appropriate circumstances. So with a
distal clavicle resection arthroplasty, Table 16-27 tells us that the rating is 10% upper extremity which is a 6%
WPI rating. However, since the surgery completely removes the AC joint by definition of a full arthroplasty or
Mumford procedure, loss of the AC joint according to Table 16-18 is 15% WPI. Some physicians will assign the
15% WPI since the entire joint is gone, replaced by scar tissue for a full Mumford procedure and may be more
accurate than the use of Table 16-27. More importantly, however, the physician must justify his or her use of
Table 16-18 and how and why one of the mentioned “other disorders” category applies in a case. In the
example above, the rotator cuff tear falls under the musculotendinous and tendonitis categories and the
physician is justified in using Table 16-18 if he or she states with reasonable medical probability how and why
this method applies and whether or not it should be combined with the loss of motion rating.
One recent AME testified in his deposition in a fractured elbow case that his rating, using Table 16-18, applied
alone and included consideration of the injured worker’s overall impairment due to the loss of motion of the
elbow, basically concluding that the rating under the “Other Disorders” section overlapped the loss of motion
rating caused by a contracture of the elbow joint. The AME explained in detail how and why he came to these
conclusions while pointing out that he used the AMA Guides, section 16.7 as a guide and applied them in this
particular case because loss of motion alone did not adequately describe the injured worker’s overall
impairment and limitations of use of the upper extremity after a poor result from two elbow surgeries that
included development of avascular necrosis of the humeral head. Counsel should make sure that the physician
actually quotes language directly from the AMA Guides while interpreting the meaning of the tables, figures and
text and how they specifically apply in a given case, which is what the AME did in this case.
Grip strength tables of normal grip and conversions to percentage grip losses are set forth in Tables 16-31
through 16-34 on page 509, but note that loss of grip strength alone is somewhat unreliable to justify upper
extremity impairment. An interesting difference between the upper extremity chapter and the lower extremity
chapter in the AMA Guides is that there are no ratings for atrophy for upper extremity conditions, but atrophy in
a lower extremity has independent WPI ratings.
When there are multiple impairments of an upper extremity, for example, injuries to the hand, wrist, elbow and
shoulder on the same side, many physicians will perform the individual impairment ratings calculations for each
sensory, motor and range of motion for each separate body part. Other physicians utilize Table 16-3 on page
439 and interpret that table to mean that a total loss of function of an entire arm is a 60 WPI rating. The
physician then describes what percentage loss of upper extremity function the patient has lost due to the
permanent objective medical findings of the hand, wrist, elbow and shoulder collectively. So if the physician
believes the patient has lost 50% of upper extremity function (ADL and work), then the patient would have an
overall 30% WPI rating for the entire upper extremity. There are no published appellate cases that indicate this
method is an appropriate application of the AMA Guides, and any physician who uses this method should
explain in detail how and why this method was used instead of a strict method of rating WPI for each separate
upper extremity body part affected by the injury.
[10] Checklist for Evaluating Upper Extremity Impairments
At the conclusion of AMA Guides, Chapter 16, pages 511–512, there is a helpful checklist of steps for
evaluating impairments of the upper extremity. If you use or derive a checklist for your cases, be sure to not
combine ratings for different parts of the upper extremity as stated in the AMA Guides checklist since we need
to rate out the WPI for each upper extremity part of body for FEC, occupation, and age, and then combine for a
final permanent disability rating. See the 2005 PDRS.
[11] FEC Adjustments
The FEC adjustments for upper extremity conditions under the 2005 PDRS depend upon where an impairment
exists in the upper extremity. The arm takes an FEC ranking of [5], except for carpal tunnel and grip/pinch
strength ratings, which take an FEC ranking of [4]. Shoulder impairments take an FEC adjustment ranking of
[7]. Elbow impairments take an FEC ranking of [2]. Wrist range of motion and other diagnoses take an FEC
Page 17 of 17
§ 3.16 AMA Guides Chapter 16: The Upper Extremities
ranking of [4]. Thumb, finger, and hand range of motion, amputation, sensory, and other impairments all take an
FEC ranking of [1]. See the 2005 PDRS, page 2-4. Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of body for
injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of 1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.17
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
[1] Overview

The following is a quick reference of common medical conditions that are found in AMA Guides
Chapter 17. There are some notes in parentheses that indicate a condition may be indirectly work
related in certain circumstances. Caution: Many medical conditions can result in impairments that are
discussed in multiple chapters of the AMA Guides.
AMA GUIDES CHAPTER 17: THE LOWER EXTREMITIES
• ALL DISORDERS INVOLVING THE FEET, HINDFEET, ANKLES, LEGS, KNEES, HIPS AND
PELVIS
• ALL ARTHRITIC CONDITIONS INVOLVING A JOINT
• DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE (DJD)
Rule number one here is that if your case involves lower extremity symptoms due to a low back injury, then you
use AMA Guides Chapter 15 for the spine and possibly AMA Guides Chapter 13 for nerve damage, rather than
AMA Guides Chapter 17. Use AMA Guides Chapter 17 for impairments to the foot, ankle, hindfeet, leg, knee,
thigh, or hip that are not caused by a lumbar spine injury.
The lower extremity impairments are reduced by a factor of .4 to convert to whole person impairment. The
rationale again is that you use 60% of your upper extremities for ADLs and only 40% of your lower extremities
for ADLs. See Table 17-3 on page 527.
The lower extremities include the feet, hindfeet, ankles, legs, knees, hips, and pelvis (also listed in AMA Guides
Chapter 15 (spine), but you use the chapter with the higher impairment rating, not both chapters). Figure 17-10
on page 561 contains a worksheet at the end of the chapter to help us along with multiple factors in a lower
extremity. In every case, follow the sequential steps for every lower extremity case listed in Steps 1 through 11
on pages 562–563.
COMMON MISTAKE:
The lower extremity WPI ratings are very conservative and very few of them refer to functional loss.
Most lower extremity ratings in Chapter 17 are based on diagnosis based criteria and there is
absolutely no medical explanation for most of the ratings, especially those in Table 17-33. So counsel
is advised to pay close attention to the objective medical findings at the time of MMI and to see if there
are better rating methods outside the lower extremity chapter. This is especially true in knee injuries
involving a partial meniscectomy.
Page 2 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
[2] 13 Methods of Evaluation
The best pneumatic formula to remember about the lower extremity chapter in the AMA Guides is: “If there are
50 ways to leave your lover, there are 13 ways to evaluate lower extremity impairments.” Table 17-1 on page
525 lists three separate categories of assessment of lower extremity impairments: anatomical, diagnosis based
estimates, and functional abnormalities. Anatomic changes include limb length discrepancy, loss of ROM,
arthritis, skin changes, amputations, atrophy, nerve impairment, and vascular derangement.
Diagnosis Based Estimates include fractures, bursitis, joint replacements, laxity of ligaments, and
meniscectomies. Functional impairments are assessed last. There is a cross-usage chart in Table 17-2 on page
526 that requires the doctor to indicate which methods of assessment were used and which gives the most
clinically accurate impairment rating. You use the highest rating among the three different methods. The AMA
Guides instruct us that the lower extremity impairment percent is based on the lower extremity being 40% of the
whole person and the foot is 70% of the lower extremity. If there are multiple parts of a lower extremity (e.g.,
ankle and knee), combine the lower extremity impairment and then convert to WPI.
However, the 2005 PDRS supersedes these instructions from the AMA Guides and requires us to rate the
ankle separately from the knee separately from the hip and so on in order to convert the lower extremity rating
to WPI, and then adjust each body part for the FEC that corresponds to that part, rate each for permanent
disability, and then combine. Some raters are taking lower extremity injuries to more than one part and
combining the impairments for those parts if the FEC adjustment is the same for each part. For example, knee
impairments take the same FEC adjustment (a ranking of [2]) as ankle impairments. See below. Also, if a
patient has bilateral conditions to the same lower extremity part of body, e.g., both knees, raters are combining
the WPI ratings for the same bilateral part, and then rating one WPI rating for both lower extremity body parts
for permanent disability.
We are seeing in our lower extremity cases a drastic reduction in permanent disability awards under the AMA
Guides. One reason is because of the new concept that the lower extremity rating is substantially less than a
lower extremity rating under the 1997 PDRS based upon the fact that the lower extremity rating is multiplied
times .40 to equal a WPI rating. The second reason is that the usual type of workers’ compensation case
involves meniscus tears, ACL reconstruction, or replacements, and, under normal circumstances, patients who
have recovered from surgery can return to normal activities of daily living with minimal impact on their daily
lives. The third reason for lower settlement amounts in lower extremity cases under the AMA Guides is because
the treating or evaluating physician has failed to properly rate the lower extremity case under Chapter 17 of the
AMA Guides.
The best advice when you see a lower extremity case is to first refer to AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Tables 17-1
and 17-2, on pages 525 and 526, respectively. You should review all 13 ways to evaluate lower extremity
impairments so that you can double check the physician’s conclusions of how the lower extremity was
evaluated according to this chapter. Table 17-2 is the most important table in Chapter 17 of the AMA Guides.
Table 17-2 is a cross-usage chart that indicates which of the 13 methods of evaluating permanent impairments
for the lower extremity can be combined with each other and which cannot be combined. You also have to
determine which method(s) of evaluation properly apply in a given case since the range of impairment ratings
may be variable. The text on page 526 of the AMA Guides provides that a strict use of Table 17-2 may not be
required:
The cross-usage chart (Table 17-2) indicates which methods and resulting impairment ratings may be
combined. It is the responsibility of the evaluating physician to explain in writing why a particular method(s)
to assign the impairment rating was chosen. When uncertain about which method to choose, the evaluator
should calculate the impairment using different alternatives and choose the method or combination of
methods that gives the most clinically accurate impairment rating … In some cases, however, more than
one method needs to be used to accurately assess all features of the impairment.
Many physicians mechanically use Table 17-2 without regard to the instructions in the text quoted above. This
is one of the rare places in the AMA Guides where the authors mandate that a physician “accurately” rate a
patient and to otherwise to use more than one method to “accurately assess all features of the impairment.”
Certainly, under current case law, described elsewhere in this guidebook, a physician can use Table 17-2 to
Page 3 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
find different ratings that apply in a case and then either combine them, add them, or strictly apply the cross-
usage chart and limit them, based on the totality of a patient’s functional abilities at the time of MMI status.
Once you learn how to read and understand Table 17-2, you can rate a lower extremity case with several of the
13 methods of evaluation. The general rules of what methods can and cannot be combined in a lower extremity
case are derived from Table 17-2 as follows:
• All methods can be combined with themselves. For example, a medial meniscus tear and a moderate
anterior cruciate ligament laxity in the same knee can both be rated by the DBE method. See Tables
17-2 and 17-33 of the AMA Guides. Multiple ratings under the DBE method are combined for the same
part of body.
• DBE can be combined with arthritis/DJD (degenerative joint disease).
• Muscle strength or weakness cannot be combined with muscle atrophy and vice versa.
• Muscle atrophy cannot be combined with DBE and vice versa.
• Muscle strength cannot be combined with DBE and vice versa.
• ROM cannot be combined with DBE, muscle strength, or muscle atrophy.
• Skin loss can be combined with everything except gait derangement.
• Peripheral nerve injury cannot be combined with muscle strength or atrophy.
• Gait derangements cannot be combined with any other method except itself.
• Limb length discrepancy can be combined with everything except gait derangement and amputation.
These are common examples of the application of the cross-usage chart in Table 17-2, but you should refer
directly to that chart in the AMA Guides while checking a medical report or cross-examining a physician. Table
17-2 has proven to be problematic. Remember, the AMA Guides are intended to be used for the effects of an
impairment on activities of daily living not including work activities. So the use of Table 17-2 is not necessarily
applicable when it comes to determination of the effects of impairment on a person’s work activities. Logically,
multiple ratable impairments to the lower extremity would have a greater effect on a person’s work activities
than any single impairment. There is no explanation by the authors of the text and of Table 17-2 that explain
medically why some impairments cannot be combined with certain other impairments.
For example, as stated above a peripheral nerve injury cannot be combined with muscle strength or atrophy.
This rubric is similar to a case in which the injured worker sustained injury to the peroneal nerve, fractured
ankle joint with surgery and resultant atrophy, severe pain (Grade 3 for sensory) and weakness in dorsiflexion
and extension. An AME lower extremity specialist testified that it makes no sense to reduce these ratable
impairments using the cross-usage chart because there is no logical medical reason to do so since each
impairment stood alone and affected the injured worker’s functioning with significant permanent objective
findings. The lesson here is that Table 17-2 is the easiest Table to rebut as applying in a California workers’
compensation case. Any physician who uses it must indicate how and why it should apply and any physician
who does not use it should also justify ignoring its application in a given case.
COMMON MISTAKE:
If any physician intentionally omits a viable WPI rating of a lower extremity impairment by stating in his
or her report that the rating cannot be combined with another one because of Table 17-2, counsel for
the applicant should schedule that physician’s deposition. Table 17-2 refers to eliminating some ratings
that overlap due to effects on ADL functioning. There are two problems with this rubric. First of all, the
authors fail to state anywhere in the text or the table itself how some impairments overlap. Secondly,
Table 17-2 is intended to compress lower extremity ratings because of alleged overlapping of effects
on ADL functioning. We are using Chapter 17 of the Guides to determine permanent disability related
to working and not just ADLs. The application of Table 17-2 is the easiest table to rebut in lower
extremity cases.
Page 4 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
[3] Gait Derangement
Gait derangement impairments must be supported by objective medical evidence, e.g., X-rays, although the
AMA Guides discourages the use of gait for an impairment rating. Table 17-5 on page 529 lists lower extremity
impairments due to mild, moderate, and severe gait derangement and dependent and full time use of assistive
devices. Note that the need of a wheelchair for severe lower extremity impairments is an 80% WPI. You cannot
combine gait impairment with any other lower extremity method, according to the cross-usage chart, Table 17-
2. In practice, we are seeing physicians assume a 15% WPI for a mild to moderate antalgic gait that is
supported by a pathophysiological condition. The doctor then estimates the portion of the 15% WPI that applies
in a case involving a less than mild to moderate antalgic gait.
There is some confusion between someone who has an “antalgic gait” and someone who has a gait
derangement. An antalgic gait is a symptom, such as a limp or a person who walks with a leg or foot in varus or
valgus compared to the opposite leg or foot. A gait derangement refers to the need to use assistive devices in
order to ambulate due to an objective medical condition that could originate in the lower extremity, brain or
spine. Not everyone who has an antalgic gait has a ratable gait derangement—that depends upon the
underlying medical condition and the need for assistive devices for ambulation. So if someone has a severe os
calcis fracture or plantar fasciitis and needs to use an orthotic inside a shoe, there may be a ratable gait
derangement impairment under Table 17-5.
Counsel needs to compare the criteria for rating gait derangement in Table 17-5 with the station and gait
impairment ratings in Table 13-15. Usually if the station and gait impairment is caused by nerve damage or
chronic pain, you use Table 13-15 which is consistent with the instructions in the text relating to those entities.
Alternatively, if there is a physiological reason for a person to ambulate with the routine use of a cane then
Table 17-5 may be more accurate as a strict WPI rating method, combined with the underlying reason for the
use of the cane, such as severe arthritis without a joint replacement. Notice that a person who is wheelchair
dependent has an 80% WPI rating under Table 17-5(k) on page 529.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Counsel should be aware that physicians can use Table 17-5 or Table 13-15 for lower extremity ratings
that affect a person’s ability to ambulate. Many physicians think, erroneously, that Table 13-15 is used
only for central or peripheral nervous system disorders and not for things like meniscus tears, fractured
legs; hip or ankle injuries. However, as discussed in this guidebook, alternative rating methods are
allowed by case law as long as the physician indicates the use of an alternative method results in a
more accurate WPI rating than a strict rating from the chapter that originally applies in a case.
[4] Atrophy
Atrophy is also a stand-alone rating of decreased muscle function. Other measures of decreased muscle
function include gait impairments, muscle weakness, and peripheral nerve injuries. See Table 17-6 on page
530. Note that 1.0 cm or greater for atrophy of the calf or thigh is ratable under that table. Many of the reports
we receive from evaluating and treating physician have these measurements in inches and not in centimeters.
Remember in elementary school, we learned that 1 inch = 2.54 centimeters. So if a person has ½ inch of
atrophy in the thigh and calf, he or she has ratable atrophy in Table 17-6 with 1.27 cm for each which is a 1%
WPI for each the thigh and calf.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Tables 17-6 (atrophy) and 17-7 and 17-8 are underutilized rating methods and counsel should point
them out if there is significant muscle weakness in a lower extremity. Many tib-fib fractures, for
Page 5 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
example, will result in atrophy of the calf and thigh and with concomitant loss of strength. Counsel
should be aware in deposing physicians in these cases that if there is any lower extremity atrophy, it is
unlikely that the atrophy will go away.
Muscle testing should not be performed on patients who are in pain because it would not be reliable. See
Tables 17-7 and 17-8 on pages 531 and 532, respectively. The DEU team who developed the 2005 PDRS
discovered a typographical error or calculation error in Table 17-8, page 532. A Grade 3 hip abduction WPI is
15%, and the lower extremity rating is 37%, and not the 27% printed in the table. Muscle weakness ratings for
the lower extremity are an often overlooked rating method that many physicians do not realize can be utilized in
our cases. Be careful here. Use of this table for knee weakness is appropriate in many cases. But use of Table
17-8 for dorsiflexion of the ankle or great toe extension may be duplicative of an impairment under ROM for the
lumbar spine motor deficits since dorsiflexion and flexion strength comes from the L-5 nerve root which may be
due to a herniated lumbar disc and is not a lower extremity impairment. You can use Table 7-8 to obtain the
rating for the neurological motor deficits caused by a lumbar spinal condition where the evaluating physician
uses the ROM method. See Section 3.15 in this guidebook.
[5] ROM Testing
If range of motion testing is performed, do three measurements, and the largest one counts. Measure ROM in
every direction of motion, e.g., the hip has six directions. ROM tables are set forth in Tables 17-9 through 17-14
on page 537. Ankylosing hips, ankles, knees, and toes are set forth in Tables 17-15 through 17-30 on pages
538 through 543, respectively. Be sure to add all impairments due to loss of range of motion in a single joint.
Thus, for a hip injury, you add the impairments for loss of range of motion for more than one range out of the
total of six. Shoulders and hips are essentially rated the same way since each has six ranges of motion. Both
joints are ball and socket joints with the difference being that the socket in the hip joint is bone from the pelvis
and the socket in the shoulder joint consists of the conjunction of four soft tissue tendons.
AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Figures 17-1, 17-2, and 17-3, pages 534–535, are diagrams that show how a
physician is supposed to measure range of motion of the hip for flexion, extension, abduction, adduction,
internal rotation, and external rotation. Figure 17-4 on page 535 shows you how knee flexion is measured, and
Figure 17-5 shows how ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion are measured. Then, range of motion impairments
for each joint in the lower extremity are given based upon “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe,” in Tables 17-9
through 17-14 as stated above. There are no formal charts showing normal ranges of motion for the hip, knee,
ankle, or toes other than by interpreting the tables and charts showing the types of impairments under mild,
moderate, and severe ratings. In other words, any measurement that is under a “mild” impairment rating is
considered a “normal” range of motion and is not subject to an impairment rating.
For example, Table 17-10 shows knee impairment due to loss of flexion with “normal” being from 0 degrees to
110 degrees. Most physicians who specialize in disorders of the knee consider normal flexion of the knee joint
to be from 0 degrees to 135 degrees. In fact, most practicing orthopedic knee specialists consider surgery a
failure if a person’s pre-injury ROM was 0 degrees to 135 degrees or greater and after surgery flexion is less
than 135 degrees but greater than 110 degrees.
As mentioned earlier, ankylosis of a joint adds impairment to range of motion impairments from an injury or
illness. AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Section 17.2g, pages 538–543, describes how ankylosis of a hip, knee, and
ankle, respectively, are handled when there is impairment to a particular joint that is already in ankylosis for one
or more ranges of motion. It is important to know that in certain injuries, a joint may become fused due to the
effects of an injury causing additional impairments than if the joint was not fused. The AMA Guides allow for
this, and you add the percentage loss of use of the lower extremity or calculated lower extremity impairment
from the ankylosis to any additional lower extremity impairment that exists to that joint from the loss of motion in
other planes. Example 17-8 on page 539 is a good example of an injured worker who suffers a hip injury that
results in ankylosis of flexion, external rotation, and abduction. Tables 17-15 through Tables 17-30, pages 538
through 543, cover cases involving ankylosis of the hip, knee, ankle, os calcis, and toes, in that order.
As a practical note, most patients with a hip that is in any kind of ankylosis will need to use a cane for
ambulation and would probably be a candidate for hip replacement surgery, which would be evaluated based
Page 6 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
upon the results of the hip replacement. See Tables 17-33 and 17-34, pages 546 and 548, respectively, and the
discussion about joint replacements below. Moreover, if an impairment rating is based upon loss of range of
motion of any lower extremity joint, counsel should question whether a gait derangement, muscle strength,
DBE, or atrophy method of evaluating impairment is more suited in a given case, regardless of which joint is
involved.
As is the case for upper extremity impairments due to loss of range of motion, in lower extremity range of
motion testing, the “normal” range of motion may be determined either by use of the tables and figures in AMA
Guides Chapter 17 or by comparing the injured lower extremity joint range of motion to the contralateral
uninjured joint.
[6] Multiple Lower Extremity Impairments
If you have a case involving more than one joint in one lower extremity, you rate each joint separately and
combine the WPI rating to see if the overall rating for the entire lower extremity is greater than 40% WPI since
that is the maximum WPI rating for any lower extremity impairment. If the aggregate WPI for both lower
extremities are each 40% WPI, then the 40% for each side is combined with each other for the final WPI rating
for both lower extremities.
However, some physicians are using Table 17-3 on page 527 to indicate a percentage loss of weight bearing
activities a person has and multiplying that times the maximum value for a leg, which is 40% WPI. So if a
patient has a bad knee, bad hip and ankle on the same side with permanent objective medical findings, the
physician should give individual WPI ratings for each body part, but if he or she feels that the patient has lost a
significant percentage of lower extremity weight bearing function, then it may be reasonable to give that
percentage loss to the total value of the leg, which is 40% WPI. So, for example, if a physician feels that based
on the residual loss of function of a leg due to permanent objective medical findings, the patient has lost 50% of
his or her weight bearing function for that leg, that would mean the patient has a 20% WPI (50% of the
maximum value for a leg is 40% WPI). The physician would have to explain in detail how and why this method
of rating is more accurate and reliable than a strict rating of each component of the lower extremity injury.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many physicians do not know that an overall impairment of a lower extremity can be based on a
percentage loss of weight-bearing function with the maximum value of the lower extremity of 40% WPI
(which is an amputated leg above the knee).
If both knees are involved in an industrial injury, rate each knee separately, then combine the results, and then
rate the overall permanent disability rating for the bilateral impairment for FEC, occupation, and age since the
FEC is the same for both knees. If the right knee and left hip are involved, rate each separately, adjust for WPI
from lower extremity ratings, and adjust for FEC and permanent disability separately since the knee has a
separate FEC than the hip. Do the same rating method if the knee and hip injuries were to the same leg. They
must be separately rated, because the FEC for the hip is a [5], while the FEC for the knee is a [2]. Once you
have the separate permanent disability ratings for the hip and the knee, then you combine the results.
COMMON MISTAKE:
If a patient has an impairment to both lower extremities affecting ambulation, it is common to add the
WPI impairments rather than use the Combined Values Chart. Case law supports this method as long
as the evaluating physician is able to state how and why adding the impairments is more accurate than
using the CVC. One common error in lower extremity cases occur when a physician provides an
impairment for the lower extremity and forgets that the patient uses a cane or other assistive device.
Counsel should always compare ratings from Chapter 17 including Table 17-5 with an alternative rating
in Table 13-15 if a person needs an assistive device for ambulation. Use of a cane actually causes a
reduction in functionality for the upper extremity that has to hold the cane during ambulation so a
Page 7 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
higher impairment rating is justified from the strict lower extremity rating alone.
[7] Arthritic Conditions
For arthritis conditions involving the lower extremities, the X-ray grading system is used (cartilage interval).
AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Table 17-31, page 544, has the standard measurements of cartilage that indicate
whether a patient has joint arthritis, and, if so, to what extent. The text indicates that the range of motion
method of evaluating impairments in arthritic patients is no good because some people with severe arthritis
have normal ROMs but they have pain and weakness. The thinning of the articular cartilage correlates well with
the disease process of all types of arthritis. Table 17-31 shows X-rays with the patient standing. Table 17-31
covers all lower extremity arthritic conditions, including those that cause impairment to the hip, knee, ankle,
patellofemoral, sacroiliac, and toes.
Of note in Table 17-31 are a number of things that are relevant to our cases. First of all there is a rating for
sacroiliac arthritis of up to 3% WPI for 1 mm or less of articular cartilage (normal is 3 mm). The sacroiliac joint is
at the junction of your lumbar spine and pelvis and we commonly see cases involving “SI joint dysfunction” as a
diagnosis in conjunction with a lumbar spinal injury. The SI joint can be rated separately from a lumbar spine
impairment since they are separate entities. The FABER test (Flexion, Abduction, and External Rotation) is
used during a physical examination of a patient to see if there is any SI joint or hip symptom. If there is, the
physician is supposed to order an X-ray or MRI to see if there is any arthritis or other pathology in the hip or SI
joint and there can be due to the aging process or trauma.
Table 17-31 is also used extensively in our cases for arthritis of a lower extremity joint, before a joint
replacement becomes necessary. The hips, knees, and ankle each have 4 mm of articulating cartilage in
normal non-arthritic people. As we age or as we wear and tear, those natural shock absorbers may degenerate
and there is no uniform age-related process of doing so. Once there is any reduction in the 4 mm joint space,
the arthritic process becomes ratable under this table. For example, we wear out our medial joint in our knees
sooner than we wear out the lateral joint because our center of gravity places more stress due to our weight on
the medial side of our body. This is why many physicians correctly apportion permanent disability to a knee due
to obesity, which in the literature is causative of degeneration of knee joints. The standard of care to determine
loss of articular space in the knees is for a doctor to order standing AP (anterior to posterior) X-rays of both
knees while the patient is standing up putting his or her weight on the knees. The physician will know,
empirically, as soon as the X-ray is read whether or not a given patient is a candidate for a knee replacement. If
there is 0 mm joint space in any one of the three compartments of the knee (medial, lateral, or patellofemoral)
then the patient needs a knee replacement if his or her symptoms are severe enough to justify the risk of
surgery.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Many attorneys do not realize that a simple X-ray of the knees while a patient is standing up is the gold
standard to determine arthritis of the knee joint. We have 4 mm of interval cartilage in our knee joint
that wears down. Each loss of 1 mm results in an impairment rating under Table 17-31. If a physician
has not performed standing AP X-rays of the knees, counsel needs to depose the physician and have
him or her order the test, It costs about $40.00 per X-ray. The term “AP” means anterior-posterior view.
The patellofemoral joint of the knee is the area below and under the knee cap and the footnote under Table 17-
31 has been applied extensively in our cases. The footnote on page 544 under Table 17-31 says:
In an individual with a history of direct trauma, a complaint of patellofemoral pain and crepitation on
physical examination, but without joint space narrowing on X-rays, a 2% WPI or 5% lower extremity
impairment is given.
Some liberal physicians assign the 2% WPI impairment for crepitation of the patellofemoral joint even if the
crepitation is not due to a “direct trauma” and is simply due to degenerative joint disease (DJD) from a
Page 8 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
cumulative trauma injury since the AMA Guides do not account for or discuss repetitive motion or cumulative
trauma injuries or conditions.
[8] Amputations
Amputations of lower extremity parts of body are listed in Table 17-32, page 545. Just as physicians are
routinely using Tables 16-2 and 16-3 to use an amputation value as a basis for a WPI rating in a complex case
that does not involve an amputation, physicians have been using Table 17-32 in the same way for lower
extremity impairments that result in what may be artificially low ratings.
For example, many physicians use Table 17-32 to rate loss of function of the hind-foot as a percentage of loss
of function of the ankle based on a 28% WPI for amputation at the hind-foot level. The hind-foot is the area
towards the back of the foot that includes the talus and calcaneus tarsal bones. If a physician uses this method,
as in using any amputation table for a WPI impairment for any condition that results in less than an amputation,
a physician may utilize this method if it provides the most accurate rating. The methods of rating ankle
impairment based on loss of motion and strength may result in a low strict rating that does not accurately reflect
a person’s actual loss of function due to a severe ankle fracture or fracture of the tibia and fibula.
For knees and other lower extremity injuries, counsel should always be wary of a physician’s use of the
amputation tables if there is no amputation in a given case. A physician must state how and why he or she is
using the percentage loss of function compared to the maximum value of an amputation as a rating method
instead of the strict diagnosis based or loss of motion methods.
[9] Diagnosis Based Estimates
The most commonly used section in AMA Guides, Chapter 17, is Table 17-33, pages 546 and 547, the
Diagnosis Based Estimates chart. Under the DBE method of assessment, the physician can rate with
absolutely no effort any kind of fracture, meniscus tear, ligament laxity, joint replacement, and just about any
common disorder of the lower extremity that we see in our cases. Do not assume that a physician’s conclusion
about impairment in a case that is based on the DBE method is the final word on what the case actually rates.
Physicians sometimes use Table 17-33 as the path of least resistance since it appears that the conclusion is
supported by the reference to the DBE chart in Table 17-33. This is precisely why you are encouraged to use
Table 17-2, page 546, to determine all possible ways to evaluate a lower extremity case in addition to the DBE
method. See the example in Ch. 4, § 4.04[7], of this guidebook, which involves a fractured patella that rated
higher using the atrophy method of evaluating permanent impairment rather than the DBE method that the
physician thought was “fair.”
If you have a knee injury case, and the physician utilizes Table 17-33, counsel should make sure that the
physician includes all Diagnosis Based Estimates ratings for all injured components of the knee without regard
to the outcome of surgery. For example, we are seeing physicians rate an ACL (anterior cruciate ligament)
repair or replacement case based upon a post-surgical anterior drawer sign, which indicates whether there is
any ACL laxity. If the anterior drawer sign is negative, then there is no ACL instability and the result of the
surgery is a “good” one. However, if the physician rates the ACL a 0% WPI because of the absence of any
ligament laxity, that conclusion is not substantial evidence. In fact, any rating based upon the result of a post-
surgical repair is not the way the DBE method of rating is intended. The physician needs to determine the PRE-
SURGICAL anterior drawer sign and findings about how bad the ACL or collateral ligament was damaged to
begin with in order to establish the rating. This method applies to all of the listed DBE conditions, except knee
and hip replacement cases, which are discussed below.
If you look at Table 17-33 on page 546 of the AMA Guides, there are categories of DBE ratings for “mild,”
“moderate,” and “severe” cruciate or collateral ligament laxity which rate 3% WPI (7% LE), 7% WPI (17% LE)
and 10% WPI (25% LE), respectively. The rating is required to be a “pre-surgical” rating since the result of
surgery is irrelevant under Table 17-33. So a partial tear of the ACL with no surgical repair should rate a 3%
WPI. A surgical repair or partial ACL replacement should rate 7% WPI and a total ACL replacement rates 10%
WPI. Most physicians would agree that the reason an ACL replacement or repair rates high despite full
functional restoration is because the replacement can become frayed, torn, or just worn out since it is not fully
bio-compatible with the original ACL that the person was born with.
Page 9 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
Remember, physicians are correctly applying the same Table 17-33 to knee cases involving a partially torn
medical or lateral meniscus. A partially torn medial or lateral meniscus rates 1% WPI (2% LE), again,
regardless of the outcome of surgery. The instructions in the AMA Guides on pages 548–549 indicate that the
physician determines whether diagnostic (Table 17-33) or the physical examination criteria (See Table 17-2)
best describes the impairment of a specific individual and that the diagnostic and physical examination criteria
impairments can be combined using Table 17-2 in some circumstances.
So if you have a case where the injured worker has partially torn medial and lateral menisci and a completely
torn ACL on the same knee, the rating under Table 17-33 is based upon the diagnosis for each condition only,
combined with each other, and it is irrelevant as to the outcome of any surgical procedures. Counsel should
make sure that the treating or evaluating physician has considered rating the case from any of the other 13
methods of rating lower extremity impairments before relying solely on Table 17-33. There will be some cases
like this example that will rate 4% WPI for the torn medial and lateral meniscus and 10% WPI for a severe
cruciate ligament laxity (from the totally torn ACL), all from Table 17-33 on page 546 of the AMA Guides. This
would combine to a 14% WPI based on the DBE method only, utilizing Table 17-33, again, without regard to the
ultimate outcome of surgical repairs of the menisci and ACL.
COMMON MISTAKE:
If a physician only uses Table 17-33 for a rating, that is a red flag for counsel for applicants. Table 17-
33 is one of the most conservative rating methods in the entire AMA Guides. Don’t you wonder why
there are very few diagnosis based ratings in the upper extremity Chapter 16? Why is there no cross-
usage chart in the upper extremity Chapter 16? Obviously, there were different authors for each
chapter and no continuity of rating methods. Table 17-33 is the easiest rating method to rebut,
especially if there is a poor surgical outcome, even with a partial meniscus tear.
The text in AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Section 17.2j, pages 545 to 549, indicates that with joint replacements
(knee or hip), patients “should have prophylactic restrictions of ADLs” to prevent further impairments. Hip
replacements are listed in Table 17-34, page 548, and knee replacements are listed in Table 17-35, page 549.
You obtain the points in either Table 17-34 or Table 17-35 and apply them with Table 17-33, page 546. With a
hip or knee replacement, there may be a limb length discrepancy as well as a “good,” “fair,” or “poor” result from
the joint replacement. Table 17-2, page 526, allows for a DBE impairment rating due to a knee or hip
replacement to be combined with a limb length discrepancy rating. Note that the pelvis in Table 17-33, page
546, is also listed in AMA Guides Chapter 15, Section 15.4, which starts on page 384.
Some detail on joint replacement cases is appropriate at this point since there is lots of confusion among
orthopedic surgeons on how to rate them. Counsel should review this section of this guidebook in any knee or
hip replacement case to make sure that the treating or evaluating physician’s conclusions constitute substantial
evidence and the report is AMA compliant.
The assessment of permanent impairment in a knee or hip replacement case involves a two-part process—one
based upon a physical examination and the other based upon the DBE in Table 17-33. For knee replacements,
you first must refer to Table 17-35 on page 549 in the AMA Guides, which requires the physician to do a
physical assessment of the result of the knee replacement. There are six assessments based upon a physical
examination that the physician must perform and separately score. The physician assigns points and adds
them for a. Pain, b. Range of motion, and c. Stability of the replacement components and then subtracts points
for d. Flexion contracture, e. Extension lag and f. Alignment. These factors and the points for each are listed in
Table 17-35. The footnote below Table 17-35 says:
The point total for estimating knee replacement results is the sum of the Points in categories a, b, and c,
minus the sum of the points in categories d, e and f.
Once the points have been appropriately added and subtracted, the total points are then compared to the
corresponding range in Table 17-33 on page 547 of the AMA Guides, with a “good result” of the knee
replacement being 85–100 points (a 15% WPI or 37% LE rating), “fair result” being 50–84 points (a 20% WPI or
50% LE rating), and a “poor result” being under 50 points (30% WPI or 75% LE). If there is a bilateral knee
Page 10 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
replacement, you rate each knee separately for permanent impairment, rate for permanent disability and then
combine using the Combined Values Chart.
Recent advances in medicine have resulted in the development of a semi-knee replacement component where
only the medial side of the knee joint is replaced and the lateral side of the joint is kept natural. The reason for
this approach is because in many cases, the medial side of the knee joint’s articulating interval cartilage wears
out first before the lateral side does. People generally put more wear and tear on the inner side of the knee joint
rather than the outer side because more weight favors the medial side over the lateral side of the leg. How do
you rate a half-replaced knee joint? Hypothetically, the physician would take half of the total value of the point
system in Table 17-35 and compare half of the totals of a, b and c minus half of the total sum of d, e and f with
half the total possible points for a total joint replacement in Table 17-33.
For total hip replacements, you first refer to Table 17-34 on page 548 of the AMA Guides. Again, you add points
in five categories based upon the physical examination and residual functioning: a. Pain, b. Function (limp,
supportive device, distance walked), c. Activities (stairs, putting on shoes and socks, sitting, public
transportation), d. deformity and e. range of motion. Once the total points are added up, you then refer to Table
17-33 on page 546 to obtain the WPI or lower extremity impairment rating based upon the range of points:
“Good results” is 85–100 points (15% WPI, 37% LE), “Fair results” is 50–84 points (20% WPI, 50% LE) and
“Poor results” is less than 50 points (30% WPI, 75% LE).
In medical reports of treating and evaluating physicians, you often see reference to the “alignment” of a leg
based upon a knee or hip joint replacement. Since the anatomical “alignment” or natural positioning of one leg
with respect to the axis of the center of the individual’s body is variable from one person to another, the
operating physician who implants the artificial joint must give an estimate of how the patient’s legs were in their
natural position with reference to the center line of the person’s body in order to approximate the patient’s pre-
morbid gait. This involves some educated guesswork by the physician since the patient is under anesthesia
during the joint replacement surgery.
COMMON MISTAKES:
In any joint replacement case counsel should make sure the evaluating physician conducts the
physical examination correctly and consistent with the rating criteria in Tables 17-34 (hip) or 17-35
(knee). Make sure you check his or her work by having him or her include in the written medical report
the raw numbers for each measurement rather than the physician saying, e.g., “The total points in this
case is 85.”
After the joint replacement surgery, if there is some degree of varus of the leg (the leg is turning in towards the
center axis of the patient’s body) or valgus of the leg (the leg is turning away or out from the center axis of the
patient’s body), then there is an alignment problem that is ratable based upon Tables 17-34 and 17-35. You
must confirm that the treating and evaluating physicians in joint replacement cases score the points for each
and every category mentioned in Tables 17-35 for knee replacements and Table 17-34 for hip replacements
before any permanent impairment rating is given from Table 17-33. Then make sure the physician applies
Table 17-2 to see if there are any other ratable impairments that can be combined with the DBE rating from
Table 17-33 for the joint replacement impairment.
Table 17-2, page 526, allows for a DBE impairment rating due to a knee or hip replacement to be combined
with a limb length discrepancy rating. Note that the pelvis in Table 17-33, page 546, is also listed in AMA
Guides Chapter 15, Section 15-4, which starts on page 384. The authors of chapter 17 did not include any
consideration for WPI ratings in cases where there have been repeated total joint replacement surgeries to the
same body part. A recent case involves a patient who has had her right knee joint replaced three times and is
now in need of a fourth replacement. The AME in the case basically had to conclude that the patient has a 30%
WPI “poor result” under Table 17-33 due to the repeat replacement surgeries and the poor results from them
since none of the replacements lasted more than five years. The AME wanted to assign over 40% WPI for the
patient just out of sympathy for her having to undergo four knee replacement surgeries to the same knee!
Page 11 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
Under the DBE method, a partial medial or lateral meniscectomy is a 1% WPI under Table 17-33, but the rating
may be greater on a physical exam under the other two methods: anatomical or functional.
[10] Peripheral Nerve Injuries
AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Section 17.2l, pages 550 to 553, covers peripheral nerve injuries involving the lower
extremities. Figures 17-8 and 17-9 on page 551 show nerve (sensory and motor) distributions from the spine to
the lower extremities. Table 17-37 is used to determine WPI or lower extremity impairments due to peripheral
nerve injuries, such as femoral nerve palsy and causalgia. Table 17-37 on page 552 is the maximum
impairment value for each nerve. The physician is required to grade the sensory and motor deficits based upon
the same grading scale (grades 0 to 5) we use in Tables 16-10 and 16-11, pages 482 and 484, respectively, for
the upper extremities, then multiply the percentage from the grade times the maximum sensory and motor
values for the involved nerve, and then calculate the impairment rating using Table 17-37, accordingly. You can
combine impairments due to lower extremity peripheral nerve injuries with all other impairment rating methods,
except muscle weakness, atrophy, and gait derangement.
COMMON MISTAKE:
The only type of case you might see involving lower extremity peripheral nerve injury is for tarsal tunnel
syndrome. This author has never seen successful tarsal tunnel surgery outcomes. Counsel is advised
to get second opinions from reputable medical doctors before any tarsal tunnel surgery is performed. In
bad result cases, station and gait impairment ratings from Table 13-15 are higher and more accurate
than those provided in Table 17-37.
[11] Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
CRPS (Complex Regional Pain Syndrome—Type I RSD or Type II causalgia) of the lower extremity is set forth
in AMA Guides Chapter 17 as well as in AMA Guides Chapter 13 (central and peripheral nervous system),
especially since CRPS is considered a lesion of the central or peripheral nervous system (brain or spinal cord).
However, you can use only one chapter, not both, and only the one that yields the highest impairment rating for
the condition. See the detailed discussion of CRPS in Chapter 4 of this guidebook.
COMMON MISTAKE:
If you are prosecuting or defending a CRPS case, you must read everything in this guidebook about
the disorder. There is significant controversy about the diagnosis and rating methods that can be used
in these cases. The important point here is that CRPS is a central nervous center disorder that began
as an upper extremity or lower extremity injury. CRPS is a totally separate diagnosis from the original
diagnosis that began with the original industrial injury.
The diagnostic criteria for CRPS has changed from a research protocol criteria to a clinical criteria which means
that the strict diagnostic list has been significantly reduced. This is because the International Association of the
Study of Pain has agreed on new diagnostic criteria in 2006 that has world-wide application. So the diagnostic
criteria for CRPS in the AMA Guides is obsolete. However, if you have a case that involves that diagnosis, the
WPI rating methods in the AMA Guides still apply.
There is a good discussion of a real example of CRPS on page 553 of the AMA Guides and should be reviewed
by counsel if you have a CRPS case. The discussion also refers to the station and gait impairment rating under
Table 13-15 and compares that rating to one under Table 17-5 as discussed in this section of this guidebook.
The text on page 553 states: “The pathology in CRPS is currently believed to occur in the central nervous
system, so the evaluator should use the station and gait impairment criteria in Table 13-15 to rate lower
extremity impairments due to lesions in the central nervous system (brain and/or spinal cord).” Current research
Page 12 of 12
§ 3.17 AMA Guides Chapter 17: The Lower Extremities
on CRPS since November 2000 when the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides was published has since confirmed
that CRPS is in fact a central nervous system disorder that originated from an upper or lower extremity
condition, or from a systemic illness.
[12] Peripheral Vascular Disease
AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Table 17-38, page 554, covers lower extremity impairments due to peripheral
vascular disease such as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Table 17-38 does not apply in cases involving an
amputation of any part of the lower extremity. Use Table 17-32, page 545, instead in those cases. Also see
Chapter 4, Table 4-5 on page 76 of the AMA Guides for impairment of a lower extremity due to peripheral
vascular disease. These two tables are not exactly the same, and counsel should be mindful of this and request
a physician to rate these conditions under both Table 17-38 and Table 4-5 and use the highest rating.
[13] FEC Adjustment
The FEC adjustments for the lower extremities include an FEC of [2] for the knee, ankle, foot, and toes, and an
FEC of [5] for the hip, leg, pelvis, fractured femur, and fractured tib/fib. See 2005 PDRS, pages 2-4 and 2-5.
Remember, the adjustment factor for all parts of body for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 is a multiplier of
1.4 or a 40% increase of each WPI rating.
The final section in AMA Guides Chapter 17 is a summary of how to rate a lower extremity case. The final step
does not apply in California workers’ compensation cases since there are different FEC adjustments for the
parts of the lower extremities. Therefore, you cannot rate each leg separately and then combine, using the
Combined Values Chart, since different parts have to be rated from WPI to permanent disability and then
combined.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.18
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.18 AMA Guides Chapter 18: Pain
The Fifth Edition of AMA Guides Chapter 18 has been substantially revised from the 4th Edition of the AMA Guides,
which had concluded that there is no consensus on how to objectively measure pain. In the Fifth Edition, the AMA
has attempted to offer a way to objectively measure pain [see page 565 of AMA Guides Chapter 18].
The Administrative Director, though, has not adopted any independent measurement of WPI due to pain except as
an add-on up to 3% WPI. See page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS. Pay close attention to the criteria for a pain related
impairment assessment as mandated in the 2005 PDRS and in Section 18.3f of the AMA Guides starting on page
575. See also AMA Guides, Table 18-4, pages 576–577.
The first rule to follow in the AMA Guides is, if there is no DSM psychiatric diagnosis with impairments along the
four spheres (ADLs, Socialization; Concentration, Persistence and Pace, and Adaptation), then you add up to 3%
WPI if the person’s pain related impairment is slightly greater than that which is expected in the physical impairment
rating.
AMA Guides Chapter 18 focuses on cases in which pain itself is the major cause of suffering, dysfunction, or
medical intervention and is likely to be permanent and stationary. Psychological factors cannot be the major cause
of pain related impairments. If they are, then you use AMA Guides Chapter 14 (mental and behavioral disorders).
As discussed in the AMA Guides on page 566, the source of pain is simply put: Nociceptors have a memory. “…
[P]ain can exist without tissue damage, and tissue damage can exist without pain.”
As stated in the AMA Guides at page 568: “… [P]ain … can become a disease unto itself.” “… [P]ain, having been
initiated by an injury or illness in the past is now relatively independent.” Chronic pain may not arise from an
objective biological dysfunction. The AMA Guides state on page 569: “… [I]n the case of fibromyalgia, reliable
diagnostic criteria exist, but physicians disagree about whether the condition diagnosed by use of these criteria has
a specific, definable biologic basis.” As stated earlier in this guidebook, some controversies on the use of the AMA
Guides in workers’ compensation cases in California cannot be resolved in the AMA Guides. For a discussion of
fibromyalgia, see Ch. 4, § 4.19, in this guidebook on developing the record to obtain accurate ratings.
The authors of the AMA Guides decided that impairment ratings for pain related disorders would not be expressed
as percentages of WPI, because none has been used or tested on a widespread basis. Excess pain is expressed
as mild, moderate, moderate-severe, and severe causing ADL deficits, e.g., a post-surgical lumbar discectomy is a
DRE Category III 10% WPI, but some patients experience excess pain that severely affects ADLs.
Figure 18-1 on page 574 sets forth the sequential steps a doctor takes in evaluating pain related impairments that
are greater than expected in the underlying organ or body function impairment in the AMA Guides. Table 18-3 on
page 575 sets forth the Class 1 to Class 4 severity index for the effect of pain related impairments on ADLs. Use
this table only as a guide since you can simply add up to 3% to a WPI.
There is a six-step process that is used to determine pain related impairments that substantially increase the
burden of an individual’s condition on his or her ADLs. We know that chronic pain is associated with physical
injuries and some may be associated with other organ/body dysfunction. Sometimes this does not happen with
every patient with a specific diagnosis. AMA Guides Chapter 18 is used when the impairment ratings in other
Page 2 of 3
§ 3.18 AMA Guides Chapter 18: Pain
chapters do not adequately capture the added burden of an illness borne by people who have a pain syndrome.
The self-report of pain related impairment must be reasonable and accurate. The first three steps in the analysis
requires self-report.
The evaluating doctor must:
1. Determine what the diagnosis is.
2. Is the person’s presentation typical of the diagnosis?
3. Is the diagnosed condition widely accepted by doctors with a well-defined pathophysiological basis?
If the answer to all three questions is “yes,” then the pain related impairment is “ratable.” If not, then the impairment
is “not ratable.” If the diagnosis is controversial or vague, then the pain related impairment is also not ratable.
If the pain related impairment is ratable or not ratable, the doctor still reviews Section 18.3d on page 573. The
doctor must give the most weight to ADL deficits over any reported pain intensity and emotional distress.
Applying the steps in Figure 18-1 on page 574, the doctor then evaluates the pain related impairment without
adding 3%:
1. The pain related impairment is substantially in excess of the body or organ rating in other chapters; or
2. The patient has a well-recognized medical condition characterized by pain without measurable organ or
body part dysfunction (see Table 18-1); or
3. The patient has a syndrome associated with an organ/body dysfunction that is ratable in other AMA Guides
chapters and may be associated with a well-established pain syndrome. The WPI for the condition does not
capture the added burden of the illness due to the pain syndrome.
If any of the above is true, then the doctor can add the 3% and classify the pain related impairment as mild,
moderate, moderately-severe, or severe and ratable or not ratable.
4. The doctor then uses the self-report questionnaire in Table 18-4 on page 576 to determine the class of pain
in Table 18-3 on page 575. Table 18-4 on page 576 measures pain severity, activity limitation, and the effect of
pain on one’s mood.
The authors of the AMA Guides acknowledge that pain affects the following functions: ADLs, socialization,
recreation, work, sleep, sexuality, and cognition. They suggest we use a Pain Disability Index (some of which are
used in Social Security disability cases, again by self report and by significant others).
The authors of the AMA Guides state: “… [I]t is unnecessary that an individual meet the diagnostic criteria for a
mood, anxiety, or other psychiatric disorder for there to be substantial suffering related to such issues as pain, loss
of meaningful and pleasurable life activities, and a bleak future.”
5. Are pain behaviors valid and credible?
This is a two-step process by the doctor. The doctor uses a pain behavior concordance/discordance analog scale
from −10 to 0 to +10 under Table 18-5 on page 580. Are the pain behaviors concordant with the clinical findings? Or
are they discordant, exaggerated, and non-physiologic? The number 0 means the doctor does not know whether
the pain behavior is concordant or discordant. The doctor determines whether the limitations a person describes
and demonstrates accurately reflect the burden of illness he or she bears during every day activities.
The second step is for the doctor to determine a global assessment of the patient’s credibility on a scale from −10
to +10. If the credibility scale is less than 0, then the person does not meet entry criteria in Section 18.3d on page
573. If the credibility score is over 0, then use Table 18-6 on page 584 to find the person’s Total Pain Related
Impairment Score. Finally, obtain the pain impairment class score under Table 18-7 on page 584.
Page 3 of 3
§ 3.18 AMA Guides Chapter 18: Pain
To summarize then, the Final Pain Impairment Rating is as follows:
1. Organ/body dysfunction rating from other AMA Guides chapters.
2. Add up to 3% WPI if the pain related impairment is slightly greater than the expected burden of illness.
3. Perform the formal pain related assessment.
4. Indicate the pain related impairment category by referring to Table 18-7 and Table 18-3 on pages 584 and
575, respectively.
5. Is the pain related impairment ratable or not ratable?
6. If the pain related impairment is ratable, is the underlying organ/body rating adequate?
Practitioners are urged to read the examples at the end of AMA Guides Chapter 18 beginning on page 586,
especially the one about carpal tunnel syndrome with a WPI of 6%. This person has a credible “severe” pain related
impairment score of 69 (the “69” is not a whole person impairment). This pain related impairment score is not
converted to a WPI. The administration or insurance company or government agency determines disability and can
use the pain related impairment as a guide to determine eligibility for benefits.
There was some discussion in our new workers’ compensation system that we may adopt the six-step formula in
some cases where the pain related impairment score becomes the whole person impairment rating, but this
remains to be seen.
The above analysis is included in this guidebook because we do not know whether any future Administrative
Director, the legislature, or the courts will adopt AMA Guides Chapter 18 as a separate pain analysis for WPI, which
is suggested in that chapter, instead of the up to 3% WPI add-on, which was adopted by the Administrative Director
in the 2005 PDRS. There is no direct FEC adjustment for a pain add-on of up to 3%WPI. All FEC adjustments are
associated with the actual part of body injured. So you obtain a WPI rating from the appropriate chapter, section,
tables, and figures in the AMA Guides, then you can add up to 3% for pain based upon medical evidence or as
ordered by a WCJ in rating instructions, then you adjust the total WPI rating including the pain add-on using the
FEC rank for the injured body part, and then rate out permanent disability for occupation and age. You are allowed
to add up to 3% WPI for pain for the entire case, not for each part of body injured. See the 2005 PDRS, page 2-5.
If a physician adds up to 3% for pain-related impairment but does not allocate the 3% between different involved
parts of body injured, then the DEU rater will do so based on the highest WPI rating among the different ratable
parts of body injured. Similarly, a physician cannot assign 3% or less pain related impairment if there is no
underlying WPI rating to begin with.
COMMON MISTAKE:
Physicians sometimes assign a 3% WPI for pain related impairment in an admitted injury case even when
there is no underlying ratable WPI impairment to the injured part of body. This is prohibited in the 2005
PDRS, based on a policy adopted by the DEU raters. So a pain add-on of up to 3% WPI has to have an
underlying ratable impairment that the pain add-on attaches to. So if a person has a sprained lumbar spine
and the AME or PQME or treating physician assigns a DRE Category, I 0% WPI rating, the physician cannot
give 1%, 2%, or 3% WPI for pain related impairment. This issue has yet to be challenged at the WCAB level.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 3.19
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 3
AMA Guides: Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis
§ 3.19 Pain Add-on for Sleep Disorders, Sexual Dysfunction and Psyche as
Compensable Consequences of Physical Injuries
As stated in Chapter 2 of this guidebook, SB 863 enacted in 2012 has statutorily excluded increases in WPI ratings
for sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction and psychiatric conditions that are caused by a physical injury. With limited
circumstances, a psychiatric disorder can be rated as an add-on if the psychiatric condition is a compensable
consequence of a physical injury that came from a violent act, was in close proximity of a violent act, or arose out of
a catastrophic injury.
Can a 3% WPI add-on for pain related impairment occur for sleep disorders, psyche, or sexual dysfunction as a
result of a physical injury? Since the statute, Labor Code § 4660.1(c), specifically excludes an increase in WPI
ratings for these components as compensable consequences of a physical injury, it stands to reason that they
cannot form the basis for a pain related impairment rating for up to 3% WPI under the 2005 PDRS on page 1-12.
This is especially problematic because a pain disorder is in the DSM IV TR and DSM-5 as a stand-alone psychiatric
disorder. However, there is no case law that says “no”, and the issue is pending resolution by the WCAB. To date,
this author has not seen this issue raised by defense counsel.
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp CHAPTER 4.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
CHAPTER 4 Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most
Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.01  Model Sequential Step Analysis
§ 4.02  Substantial Evidence Defined
§ 4.03  AMA Compliant Reports
[1]  Defined
[2]  Required Elements
§ 4.04  The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
[1]  In General
[2]  Example #1: Lumbar Spine Impairment Rating
[3]  Example #2: Upper Extremity (Left Wrist) Impairment Rating
[4]  Example #3: Multiple Orthopedic Impairment Ratings
[5]  Example #4: Upper Extremity (Shoulders, Wrists, Elbow) Impairment Rating
[6]  Example #5: Lumbar Spine, Thoracic Spine, and Hip Impairment Ratings
[7]  Example #6: Lower Extremity (Patella Fracture) Impairment Rating
[8]  Example #7: Head Injury Impairment Rating
§ 4.05  Establishing Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.06  Justification for Use of the Guides in Workers’ Compensation Cases
§ 4.07  Development of the Record Using AMA Guides Chapters 1 and 2
§ 4.08  Population Averages
§ 4.09  Age or Gender Related Impairments
§ 4.10  Use of Clinical Judgment
§ 4.11  Practical Applications of the Guides
Page 2 of 3
Synopsis to CHAPTER 4 : Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.12  Measurements Must Be Reliable
§ 4.13  Assistive Devices
§ 4.14  Side Effects of Medication
§ 4.15  Spinal Injury Cases—DRE vs. ROM Methods
§ 4.16  Muscle Strength Deficits
§ 4.17  How to Rate Chronic Pain Syndromes
§ 4.18  Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
[1]  Overview
[2]  The Politics of Medicine
[3]  Strict Ratings of CRPS
[4]  CRPS as a Central Nervous System Disorder: A Case Study
§ 4.19  Thoracic Outlet Syndrome
§ 4.20  Failed Lumbar Syndrome
§ 4.21  Rating Chronic Pain in the Absence of Objective Medical Evidence
§ 4.22  Rating Narcotic Addiction and Dependency
§ 4.23  Multiple System Impairments
§ 4.24  Sleep Disorders
[1]  Introduction and Background
[2]  Is Sleep Disorder Ratable?
[3]  AMA Guides Discussion of Sleep Disorders
[4]  Checklist for Sleep Disorder Claims
§ 4.25  Obstructive Sleep Apnea
§ 4.26  Fibromyalgia
[1]  Introduction and Background
[2]  Inconsistency in AMA Guides Regarding Fibromyalgia
[3]  Is Fibromyalgia Ratable?
§ 4.27  Pain Add-Ons
§ 4.28  Zero Percent Impairment Ratings
Page 3 of 3
Synopsis to CHAPTER 4 : Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.29  Headaches
§ 4.30  The Cannon Case: Permanent Objective Medical Diagnosis
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.01
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.01 Model Sequential Step Analysis
In a case that involves the AMA Guides, the WCAB and all of the workers’ compensation judges should consider
following a sequential step analysis to determine what medical reports constitute substantial medical evidence. How
is the evidence in the record to be weighed in a case that involves the AMA Guides and where the 2005 PDRS
clearly applies? In an AMA Guides case, it is probable that the record as a whole will consist of the reports of the
treating physicians, an AME or panel QME report, along with other documentary evidence and oral testimony from
witnesses.
Model Sequential Step Analysis of Medical Evidence
1. What medical issues are in dispute between the applicant and defendant?
2. Which medical report(s) is/are each party relying on and why?
3. Are the relied upon reports substantial evidence [see § 4.02]?
4. Are the relied upon reports “AMA compliant” [see § 4.03]? Does each report follow the proper descriptions
and measurements of the AMA Guides pursuant to Labor Code § 4660(b)(1), and are they consistent with
the 2005 PDRS?
5. Which report is more credible and persuasive on the disputed medical issues and why?
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.02
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.02 Substantial Evidence Defined
What does “substantial medical evidence” mean? The analysis of what constitutes substantial medical evidence
also has a sequential analysis and is best described in Part II.E. of the WCAB en banc decision Escobedo v.
Marshalls [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604, 620–621]:
1. “… [I]n order to constitute substantial evidence, a medical opinion must be predicated on reasonable medical
probability.” [Citing McAllister v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd. (1968) 69 Cal. 2d 408, 413, 416–417, 419,
71 Cal. Rptr. 697, 33 Cal. Comp. Cases 660, 445 P.2d 313]
2. “… [A] medical opinion is not substantial evidence if it is based on facts no longer germane, on inadequate
medical histories or examinations, on incorrect legal theories, or on surmise, speculation, conjecture, or
guess.” [Citing Hegglin v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd. (1971) 4 Cal. 3d 162, 169, 93 Cal. Rptr. 15, 36
Cal. Comp. Cases 93, 480 P.2d 967; Place v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd. (1970) 3 Cal.3d 372, 378–
379, 90 Cal. Rptr. 424, 35 Cal. Comp. Cases 525, 475 P.2d 656; Zemke v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd.
(1968) 68 Cal.2d 794, 798, 69 Cal. Rptr. 88, 33 Cal. Comp. Cases 358, 441 P.2d 928]
3. “… [A] medical report is not substantial evidence unless it sets forth the reasoning behind the physician’s
opinion, not merely his or her conclusions.” [Citing Granado v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1968) 69
Cal.2d 399, 407, 71 Cal. Rptr. 678, 33 Cal. Comp. Cases 647, 445 P.2d 294; see also Zemke v.
Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd. (1968) 68 Cal.2d 794, 799–801, 441 P.2d 928; 69 Cal. Rptr. 88, 33 Cal.
Comp. Cases 358]
4. “… [A] medical opinion must be framed in terms of reasonable medical probability, it must not be speculative,
it must be based on pertinent facts and on an adequate examination and history, and it must set forth
reasoning in support of its conclusions.” [Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604, 621
(Appeals Board en banc decision)]
In the context of a medical report that is based upon the AMA Guides, it is vital that the physician’s conclusions are
based upon an adequate examination of the applicant. The nature and type of physical examination of a person
under the AMA Guides is much more involved and crucial to the physician’s conclusions than a physical
examination occurring under the 1997 Rating Schedule.
For example, a physician’s reliance on a technician to conduct range of motion testing is suspect. Likewise, a
computer program that calculates impairment ratings or that records the range of motion angles is also suspect.
The physical examination of the applicant must conform to the standards for the descriptions and measurements of
the AMA Guides, including the requirement that the physician conduct the physical examination and measurements
using active range of motion and not assisted or passive range of motion.
The rationale is that active range of motion is the only valid means to truly test the effect of an impairment on a
person’s activities of daily living. For example, in a shoulder injury, a physician may be able to force flexion and
extension of an injured shoulder from 180 degrees flexion to 50 degrees extension and abduction from 0 degrees to
180 degrees with severe pain [see AMA Guides, Figures 16-38 and 16-41, pages 475 and 477, respectively].
However, if the active range of motion for flexion or abduction of the shoulder is only 90 degrees, the loss of motion
in real life would affect the person’s ability to perform overhead activities, such as combing hair or working above
shoulder level [see Ch. 3, § 3.17].
Page 2 of 4
§ 4.02 Substantial Evidence Defined
NOTE:
Part II.E. of the Escobedo decision does not refer solely to an analysis of apportionment of permanent
disability, but to any disputed medical-legal issue that is addressed by a treating or evaluating physician. All
medical issues addressed by a physician in a medical report must follow existing case law for substantiality
that is well articulated by the WCAB in Escobedo. ■
NOTE:
As noted in Escobedo, the seminal case on the quality or lack of quality of an expert witness’s conclusions is
People v. Bassett [(1968) 69 Cal.2d 122, 70 Cal. Rptr. 193, 443 P.2d 777], which states that “the chief value
of an expert’s testimony rests upon the material from which his or her opinion is fashioned and the reasoning
by which he or she progresses from the material to the conclusion, and it does not lie in the mere expression
of the conclusion; thus the opinion of an expert is no better than the reasons upon which it is based.” 
Over the years since the enactment of SB 899 in 2004 and SB 863 in 2012, our case law on apportionment
of permanent disability and substantial medical evidence has evolved. But to this day, over a decade and a
half since the Escobedo case was issued by the WCAB en banc in 2005, workers’ compensation law on
apportionment and substantial medical evidence on that issue has relied on the same case. Here is a recent
example of a dialogue between a workers’ compensation judge and a panel QME physician whose report
and conclusions did not constitute substantial medical evidence on the issue of apportionment.
The case involves an injured worker whose original lumbar spine injury occurred in 2003 while he was
working an arduous job as a delivery driver of heavy construction materials. He sustained an admitted L4-L5
disc herniation and had decompression surgery in late 2003. In 2005 he returned to work for various
companies through December 2015 in which he also was a delivery driver and engaged in heavy lifting
activities. In December 2015, he was a delivery driver for a liquor/beer distributor and when he twisted inside
the trailer of his truck moving cases of wine, he heard a “pop” in his back. He had lumbar spinal surgery with
a L5-S1 disc herniation.
The PQME utilized the ROM method to determine permanent impairment of the lumbar spine when the
Applicant was MMI but it was clear the physician did not apply principles of apportionment correctly. He also
did not discuss whether the DRE or ROM or any alternative method of rating WPI was more accurate. The
judge wrote a letter to the doctor as follows:
In your PQME report dated June 23, 2017 you apply the Range of Motion (ROM) method to determine
the Applicant’s permanent impairment to his lumbar spine. However, you do not indicate in your report
whether you conclude that the ROM method is the most accurate method to determine WPI ratings in
this specific case. As to your conclusions about the actual WPI ratings and the method you utilized in
this case (here, ROM), please respond to the following questions in your supplemental report:
1. Is the Range of Motion method the most accurate method to determine WPI in this case for the
Applicant’s lumbar spine in accordance with Milpitas Unified School District (Guzman) v. WCAB
[(2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837], aka “Almaraz-Guzman”? If so why is it
the most accurate?
2. If the Range of Motion method is not the most accurate, why isn’t it the most accurate rating method in
this specific case?
3. What alternative method provides the most accurate WPI rating in this case?
4. Why is the alternative method the most accurate WPI rating in this case?
Page 3 of 4
§ 4.02 Substantial Evidence Defined
5. Are your conclusions based on reasonable medical probability?
As to apportionment of permanent disability, in your PQME report dated June 23, 2017, you state as follows
at pages 22–23:
“Assuming he had no residual issues, and full range of motion of lumbar spine after the L4-5 discectomy
of July 8, 2003, his estimated impairment rate before December 30, 2015 is 8% whole person
impairment which corresponds to section II-D of table 15-7, page 404. Therefore, I would apportion 53%
(8/15) of his current impairment level to previous injury of January 29, 2003 and remaining 47% (7/15)
to current industrial injury of December 30, 2015.”
Based upon current case law and this Court’s analysis of precedence, your method of apportionment does
not constitute substantial medical evidence for a number of reasons. First of all, you did not personally
examine the Applicant at the time he was declared MMI from his January 29, 2003 injury and you cannot
utilize another physician’s measurements or method to assign a retroactive impairment rating. Therefore,
you cannot assign a retroactive impairment rating unless you were the original examining physician in the
earlier case. Secondly, you apportion impairment ratings and not permanent disability. Please bear in mind
that apportionment applies to permanent disability and not to impairment ratings—by law, WPI ratings are
first converted to permanent disability ratings by adjustment with an increase of a 1.4 multiplication factor,
and adjusted by the injured employee’s age and occupation and then apportionment factors are applied. I
am requesting that you follow the instructions below and revise your apportionment analysis.
In Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (WCAB en banc decision), the WCAB gave
physicians, attorneys, and judges the parameters to follow in determining apportionment of permanent
disability under Labor Code § 4663. A medical report must be based upon reasonable medical probability, it
must not be speculative, it must be based on pertinent facts and on an adequate examination and history
and it must set forth reasoning in support of its conclusions. The following language is taken verbatim from
the Escobedo decision:
“[I]f a physician opines that approximately 50% of an employee’s back disability is directly caused by the
industrial injury, the physician must explain how and why the disability is causally related to the
industrial injury (e.g. the industrial injury resulted in surgery which caused vulnerability that necessitates
certain restrictions) and how and why the injury is responsible for approximately 50% of the disability.
And, if a physician opines that 50% of an employee’s back disability is caused by degenerative disc
disease, how and why it is causing permanent disability at the time of the evaluation, and how and why
it is responsible for approximately 50% of the disability.” [Escobedo v. Marshalls, (2005) 70 Cal. Comp.
Cases 604 at 621]
As you point out in your report dated June 23, 2017 the Applicant worked for various employers from 2005
until his December 30, 2015 injury in which his job duties continued to be that of a delivery driver and
consisted of heavy work activities. Labor Code § 4663 requires you to indicate, with reasonable medical
probability, approximately what percentage of permanent disability is attributed to the injury of December 30,
2015 and approximately what percentage of permanent disability is due to other factors, which factors can
include prior industrial injuries, subsequent industrial injuries, and any non-industrial factors. You must state
how and why you came to your conclusions and the rationale for your conclusions.
With these guidelines in mind, please also answer the following questions:
Keeping in mind that Labor Code § 4663 does allow for rehabilitation from prior injuries to the same part
of body, and keeping in mind that the Applicant's prior lumbar spinal injuries on January 29, 2003
occurred primarily to his L4-L5 disc and the December 30, 2015 industrial injury occurred primarily to his
L5-S1 level, utilizing the range of motion rating that you personally performed (unless a more accurate
WPI method applies per above) and as indicated in your June 23, 2017 report on Page 17:
Page 4 of 4
§ 4.02 Substantial Evidence Defined
1. Approximately what percentage of the Applicant’s current overall permanent disability is caused
directly by the December 30, 2015 specific injury?
2. Approximately what percentage of the Applicant’s current permanent disability is directly caused by
other factors?
3. The term “other factors” includes any prior industrial or non-industrial injuries or conditions and any
subsequent industrial or non-industrial conditions, if any, after the subject injury of December 30,
2015.
4. You must state in your report that your conclusions therein are based on reasonable medical
probability and indicate the rationale for your conclusions.
This case illustrates the application of principles to develop the record on the most accurate WPI ratings on
one end of the case and proper application of principles of apportionment on the other end of the case.
Counsel should read this material carefully because the example is a wonderful teaching moment to learn
how to apply the legal standards set forth in Guzman III and Escobedo for obtaining the most accurate WPI
rating and correct legal standards in applying apportionment in a somewhat complicated case. Counsel
should utilize this case as a template in advocacy letters and if necessary in depositions of physicians
whose conclusions can be rehabilitated to constitute substantial medical evidence. ■
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.03
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.03 AMA Compliant Reports
[1] Defined
What is an “AMA compliant” medical report? The term was coined for two purposes. The first is for the parties,
raters, counsel, and judges to determine whether a medical report in question correctly follows the descriptions
and measurements of the AMA Guides as mandated by Labor Code § 4660(b)(1). The second purpose is to
determine whether the medical report follows California law, including a reflection of the physician’s
understanding of the 2005 PDRS, which modifies a literal application of the AMA Guides with certain nuances
discussed in this guidebook and medical-legal issues that will ultimately be determined by decisional case law.
In order to follow the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides, the physician must comply with
Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides, along with Administrative Director Rule 10606 [8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10606] [see
Ch. 3, § 3.03]. A checklist of the elements required for a medical report to be “AMA compliant” is set forth in [2],
below.
[2] Required Elements
The following checklist of the elements required for a medical report to be “AMA compliant” is a combination of
Administrative Director Rule 10606 [8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10606] and Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides.
• Purpose of the examination (treating physician, AME, Panel QME, or QME)
• History of present illness
• Chief complaints
• Pre-injury and post-injury activities of daily living (Table 1-2 on page 4 of AMA Guides)
• Past medical history
• Job description
• Review of submitted medical and legal records, including a list of items reviewed
• Physical examination (includes who and what methods used) and findings on examination
• Diagnostic and imaging study results
• Diagnosis and impression
• Discussion and conclusions
• Causation of the injury (specific injury, continuous trauma or both?)
• Has applicant reached maximum medical improvement and is permanent and stationary?
• Objective findings: loss of range of motion, neurological deficits by sensory deficits (pain, numbness,
loss of tactile discrimination, tingling) and motor function deficits (muscle weakness, atrophy),
spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, herniated intervertebral disc, nerve impingement, etc.
• Discussion of negative or positive diagnostic tests or imaging studies.
Page 2 of 2
§ 4.03 AMA Compliant Reports
• Description of impairments for each separate part of body using specific chapters, tables, and page
numbers, and describing the method(s) of evaluation (DRE, ROM, both; DBE, functional loss,
anatomic loss; combining and adding there appropriate).
• Are physician’s conclusions consistent with the 2005 PDRS and relevant case law?
• How does the industrial injury currently affect the applicant’s ADLs?
• Physician’s rationale for using a particular method of descriptions and measurements from the AMA
Guides.
• Causation of permanent impairments (apportionment), how and why other factors are causing
permanent disability in addition to industrial factors.
• Recommendations for further medical treatment.
• Can the applicant perform his or her usual and customary job duties?
• What are the applicant’s residual functional capacities (listed in Form PR-4 “Primary Treating
Physician’s Permanent and Stationary Report”; see 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 9785.4) and work
restrictions?
• Does the WPI impairment rating accurately describe and take into account the permanent effects of
the industrial injury on the applicant’s ability to perform ADLs and work activities?
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.04
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and
Non-AMA Complaint Medical Reports
[1] In General
The following seven examples are actual cases that were subject to the AMA Guides when a physician issued
a permanent and stationary report that indicated the applicant reached maximum medical improvement. Some
of the reports are substantial evidence and comply with Administrative Director Rule 10606 [8 Cal. Code Reg.
§ 10606] and Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides, and are consistent with the descriptions and measurements of the
AMA Guides and the 2005 PDRS. Other reports are not compliant with the AMA Guides and do not constitute
substantial medical evidence. As you read the salient information about each case, see if you can tell what is
wrong, if anything, with the report. You may want to consult with Ch. 3 of this guidebook and have the AMA
Guides handy to check for specific instructions, tables, and figures that are referred to below.
Medical conclusions by a treating or evaluating physician that involve a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides
5th Edition must constitute substantial evidence. In addition, a medical opinion that starts with a strict
interpretation of the AMA Guides but then rebuts that interpretation by indicating that the strict interpretation
would result in an inaccurate permanent disability determination due to the effects of the impairment on the
injured worker’s ADL functioning and his or her ability to engage in work activities must also constitute
substantial evidence. What happens if an impairment rating that is based on a strict interpretation and another
WPI rating that rebuts the strict one, both constitute substantial evidence?
There will be situations when a WCJ would have to determine which conclusion by the same or different
physicians constitutes substantial evidence, i.e., the strict interpretation or the alternative WPI rating if the strict
one is inaccurate. Remember, all medical conclusions must constitute substantial evidence based upon
objective medical evidence. But then the WCJ would have to determine in any case in which multiple opinions
are given by the same or different physicians, which one is the most persuasive and credible.
Does every physician have to issue an opinion about whether or not a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides is
accurate to the permanent effects of the permanent impairment on the injured worker’s ability to perform ADLs
and work activities? The best practice for physicians under current case law is “yes.” Physicians in any MMI or
P&S report should always comment upon a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides as part of their discussion
about any permanent impairment and the rationale for a rating. See the detailed discussion in Chapter 7 of this
guidebook about rebutting a strict impairment rating under the AMA Guides.
The examples in this chapter are based on using standards developed by the DEU and a paucity of prior case
law that result in mostly a strict or literal interpretation of the AMA Guides 5th Edition. Unless otherwise noted,
these examples use a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides 5th Edition. However, the debate in spinal cases
as to whether a physician is to use the DRE or ROM method, has not been uniformly resolved in case law. That
debate will continue even under current evolving case law that allows an evaluation of the accuracy of an
impairment rating and how the impairment affects a person’s ability to perform ADLs and work activities. This
chapter assists you in understanding how the AMA Guides 5th Edition applies in real cases.
[2] Example #1: Lumbar Spine Impairment Rating
Facts:
Page 2 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
The applicant is a 17-year-old female grocery stock clerk who lifted a case of 24 bottles of beer and felt her low
back “snap.” Two months after the incident, the treating physician declared her condition as permanent and
stationary and MMI as follows:
MRI of the lumbar spine reveals L5-S1 disc degeneration with a 3-4 mm broad based central bulge
encroaching on the anterior epidural fat without obvious nerve compression and without significant canal
stenosis.
In the lumbar spine examination, the doctor stated:
Patient flexes so that the fingertips reach approximately 12 inches above the floor. The patient extends to
20% of normal and laterally rotates (sic) to 50% of normal. All range of motion is limited by pain. There is
tenderness to palpation throughout the lumbar spine from L1 to L5, but there is no obvious paraspinal
muscle spasm.
Under impairment rating, the doctor opined:
[Patient] has severe symptoms in her low back and bilateral legs that do not correlate with her MRI
findings. She has a mild disc bulge without impingement on the nerves although the films were not
available today. All limitations of motion are due to pain only. The symptoms in her legs are in a
nondermatomal distribution. Therefore, according to AMA Guides … my recommendation is that the patient
be assigned a DRE Category I, 0% impairment of the whole person.
Commentary:
This report is not AMA compliant and is not substantial evidence for the following reasons:
1. No flexion-extension X-rays. There are no flexion-extension X-rays to determine whether there is any
intervertebral instability.
2. No EMG/NCV study. There is no EMG/NCV study to see if there is a verified lower extremity
radiculopathy. The statement that the pain down the applicant’s leg is “nondermatomal” is speculative
since the physician did not review any EMG or NCV and he never gave the applicant the benefit of the
doubt that she has radicular symptoms.
3. Correct ROM testing not performed. The physician did not perform a correct range of motion testing.
There is no evidence he used an inclinometer or other proper instrument. There is no such thing as
“lateral rotation” in a lumbar spine range of motion test. Rotation is a hip function. The only valid planes
to test range of motion for a lumbar spine is forward flexion, backwards extension, and right and left
lateral flexion or bending [see AMA Guides, Figure 15-8, page 405, Table 15-8, page 407, Figure 15-9,
page 408, Table 15-9, page 409, text from pages 405 through 409, with the summary form, Figure 15-
10, page 410].
4. MRI films not reviewed. The physician cannot see how much space is in the spinal canal without an
MRI. A 3–4 mm disc bulge could be clinically significant, and the applicant could have concordant pain
with this MRI finding.
Afterword:
The applicant was later referred to an AME in orthopedic surgery who opined that the applicant has a DRE
Category III whole person impairment rating of 13% because of the severity of having a 3–4 mm disc bulge at
age 17 with non-verified but credible radiculopathy and impingement of the bulge on the epidural fat.
The AME opined that the 3–4 mm disc bulge is equivalent to a herniation in a patient this young. He indicated
that he used the DRE method rather than the ROM method because the impairment was caused by a specific
injury. For the record, the ROM method would have resulted in the same level of impairment in this case as the
DRE method. The AME also stated that the injury has drastically affected the applicant’s ADLs, including the
fact that she cannot participate in any physical education activities while in her senior year in high school.
[3] Example #2: Upper Extremity (Left Wrist) Impairment Rating
Facts:
Page 3 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
The applicant is a 63-year-old female librarian who slipped and fell and landed on her left major wrist, causing a
closed left distal radius fracture. The fracture was reduced by a cast and removed after six weeks with intensive
physical therapy. She was further diagnosed with post traumatic left carpal tunnel syndrome and referred for an
EMG/NCV, which showed severe compression of the median nerve at the left carpal canal.
In his permanent and stationary MMI report, the treating physician stated: “In the patient’s own words the
following was described: ‘I’m doing well and really have no problems and the problems I do have, I am learning
to live with.’ ” The physician measured the applicant’s range of motion to her left wrist as follows: Extension 45
degrees, flexion 60 degrees, radial deviation 15 degrees and ulnar deviation 25 degrees. (Normal range of
motion for a wrist is flexion 60 degrees, extension 60 degrees, radial deviation 25 degrees, ulnar deviation is 30
degrees).
The physician used the correct upper extremity impairment rating chart [see AMA Guides, Figure 16-1a and 16-
1b, pages 436 and 437) and assigned a 5% upper extremity impairment rating due to the loss of range of
motion in the wrist. (He correctly used AMA Guides, Figure 16-26, page 466 for flexion and extension of the
wrist, Figure 16-28 Pie Chart on page 467 for the rating, Figure 16-29 on page 468 for radial and ulnar
deviation, and Figure 16-31 on page 469 Pie Chart for the rating). The 5% upper extremity rating converts to a
3% whole person impairment rating.
The defendant and applicant signed a Stipulation With Request for Award based upon the above for a 3%
permanent disability, which was submitted to the WCJ for approval. The applicant was not represented by legal
counsel at the time the settlement was submitted for approval.
NOTE:
The WCJ expressed concern that “something was wrong” with the submitted settlement, and he
consulted this guidebook and the AMA Guides. ■
This medical report is not AMA compliant and does not constitute substantial evidence for the following
reasons:
1. Nerve conduction study not included. The physician failed to include a copy of the nerve conduction
study with the permanent and stationary report.
2. Proper grading system for sensory and motor function impairments not used. The physician failed
to evaluate the carpal tunnel syndrome using the grading system for sensory and motor function
impairments in the AMA Guides, Chapter 16, peripheral nerve system impairment as required on the
Upper Extremity Impairment Evaluation Record, Figure 16-1b, page 437. He should have graded the
sensory and motor function impairments using the severity of the EMG/NCV results, along with the
applicant’s more detailed description of what she meant by saying she “has learned to live with it”
concerning her carpal tunnel syndrome.
3. ADLs not addressed. The physician failed to specifically indicate how the left wrist injury has affected
the applicant’s activities of daily living using the AMA Guides, Table 1-2 on page 4.
4. Incorrect upper extremity rating. The physician should have referred to AMA Guides Tables 16-10, 16-
11, and 16-15 to determine the upper extremity rating for the sensory and motor impairments from the
carpal tunnel syndrome.
Here, the applicant probably has at least a 25% loss (Grade 4) of median nerve sensory function (25% of
39 = 10% upper extremity rating) and a 25% loss (Grade 4) of motor function (25% of 10 = 3% upper extremity
rating). The 10% sensory and 3% motor upper extremity rating is combined to equal 13% upper extremity
rating = 8% whole person impairment rating for the carpal tunnel syndrome. This rating would then be combined
with the wrist range of motion impairment of 3% whole person to rate 11% whole person impairment.
The 3% wrist loss of motion whole person impairment rating would then be rated for permanent disability
adjusting for FEC, age, and occupation separately from the 8% whole person impairment rating adjusted to
Page 4 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
permanent disability for the carpal tunnel syndrome and then the final permanent disability ratings for each
would then be combined for an overall permanent disability rating.
Note in this example that the applicant was in pro per, and the WCJ had the duty to determine whether the
settlement was adequate. Even without the issue of whether the medical report was AMA compliant, the
settlement submitted here was inadequate in the first place because the Stipulated Award was based upon the
whole person impairment rating alone, without it having been rated out for FEC, age, and occupation, which
would have been greater than the 3% submitted Stipulated Award.
Afterword:
The WCJ ordered the matter into an adequacy hearing, and the panel QME process will be initiated pursuant to
Labor Code § 4062.1 if the parties cannot agree to a rating that correctly reflects this applicant’s left wrist
conditions. In the alternative, the WCJ may refer the matter back to the treating physician to develop the record,
referring the physician to the proper sections in the AMA Guides Chapter 16 and the Tables and Figures
mentioned above. See McDuffie v. Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transit Authority [(2002) 67 Cal. Comp.
Cases 138 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]. Otherwise, the WCJ could refer the matter out to a “regular
physician” for an expert opinion from a board certified hand surgeon pursuant to Labor Code § 5701, also in
compliance with McDuffie.
[4] Example #3: Multiple Orthopedic Impairment Ratings
Facts:
The pro per applicant, who is 50 years old, was a 16-year employee of a grocery store and performed stock
work and cashiering. She developed multiple orthopedic injuries due to continuous trauma to her lumbar spine,
thoracic spine, right knee, and both wrists, as well as stress incontinence, inability to engage in sexual relations,
psychiatric depression, and medication dependency. A panel QME (who later became the applicant’s primary
treating physician) in April 2006 issued a permanent and stationary report, indicating the applicant’s
impairments with respect to her lumbar and thoracic spine, both wrists, and right knee as follows:
Lumbar spine: Using the DRE method, the lumbar and lumbosacral spine can be rated as follows: 5–8
percent for muscle spasms, 5–8 percent for asymmetry of the spinal motion, 5–8 percent for reflex
abnormalities, 10–13 percent for weakness and/or sensory loss of the dermatome distribution by the S1
nerve root and 10–13 percent for atrophy of the spinal musculature, 10–13 percent for radiculopathy.
Taking pain into consideration as well as the DRE, the lumbar spine rating should be 13 percent.
Thoracic spine: Using the DRE method, the thoracic spine DRE rating is 6 percent. Since both the
extremities are also affected, the total DRE rating is 25 percent excluding the carpal tunnel syndrome and
also the psychological depression.
Lower extremity: Thigh atrophy is 3 percent, mild calf atrophy is 3 percent, ACL laxity 7 percent, partial
meniscectomy at 2 percent and DRE at 9 percent, combined at 7 percent and 2 percent. Converting the
lower extremity rating to WPI is 9.04 percent equals 2.
Right knee: WPI is 4 percent as follows: right thigh atrophy is 3 percent, calf muscle atrophy is 3 percent,
ACL laxity is 7 percent, partial meniscectomy is 2 percent and DRE is 9 percent (combination of 7 and 2
percent). Therefore, the right lower extremity is .40 × 9 = 4 percent.
Bilateral hands: The patient still suffers from carpal tunnel syndrome of the bilateral hands. Even though
the carpal tunnel syndrome is permanent and stationary, the patient still requires treatment in the form of
surgery for this. Therefore, the whole disability rating for this is approximately 13 percent, taking the right
and left hand into consideration.
Taking into account the above values, the total WPI disability is 38 percent. As for her work, she is still only
able to do semi-sedentary work. Even if you take the psychiatric component into consideration, then she is
only able to do sedentary work. Therefore, the final conclusion is sedentary type work with a total WPI
disability is 38 percent.
Commentary:
Page 5 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
This medical report is not AMA compliant and does not constitute substantial evidence. Unfortunately, the
physician did not correctly apply any of the chapters in the AMA Guides. This report reflects what happens
when a physician does not follow the instructions in the AMA Guides in each chapter for each body part:
1. Unclear why DRE method used for lumbar spine evaluation. The lumbar spine evaluation does not
explain why the physician chose the DRE method instead of the ROM method. In fact, the ROM
method would have been more appropriate here because the applicant has multiple pathologies within
the same sub-region that are causing impairments.
2. DRE category rating system erroneously applied. The physician incorrectly used the DRE Category
rating system by erroneously assigning a DRE category rating to each finding on examination, i.e.,
muscle weakness, asymmetry of spinal motion, sensory and motion abnormalities.
3. Unclear why DRE method used for thoracic spine evaluation. The thoracic spine rating of 6 percent
may be correct, but the physician does not explain why he used the DRE method instead of the ROM
method.
4. Unclear why lower extremity evaluated separately from right knee. The lower extremity section of
the physician’s report is also confusing and not in accordance with the AMA Guides. It is unknown why
the physician evaluated the “lower extremity” separately from the right knee. The physician assigned
DRE ratings to each lower extremity impairment, which ratings do not exist in Chapter 17 of the AMA
Guides. DRE categories apply only in spinal impairments and not in lower extremity ratings. This
physician may be confusing DRE spinal impairments from Chapter 15 with Diagnosis Based Estimates
(DBE) for lower extremity impairments in Chapter 17 of the AMA Guides.
5. Improper evaluation of right knee condition. The physician did not follow the AMA Guides instructions
for evaluating the right knee condition, including the requirement that he start with Table 17-2, page
526, in the AMA Guides, which indicates what combination of factors are ratable for a lower extremity
condition. Instead, he again assigns a separate “DRE rating” for each condition to the knee. It is a
mystery where he got the DRE ratings from since they are not listed in Chapter 17, The Lower
Extremities. That chapter uses Diagnosis Based Evaluation, Table 17-33, pages 546–547, for lower
extremity impairments that are combined with other ratable factors listed in Table 17-2, page 526, of
the AMA Guides.
6. Improper evaluation of bilateral hands and wrists. For the bilateral hands and wrists, the physician
failed to follow the instructions in AMA Guides Chapter 16, including measuring range of motion and
sensory and motor function impairments using the grading system for nerve and motor function
described in § 3.16 of this guidebook.
7. Stress incontinence and psychiatry not addressed. There were no QME reports on the stress
incontinence or psychiatry, nor was there a referral for an opinion by this QME to any other specialist
even though Labor Code § 4062.1 requires this PQME to suggest the applicant be sent to QMEs in
other specialties. A QME can bring in a consultative physician to assist the QME in arriving at their
medical-legal conclusions, much like a psychiatrist will bring in a psychologist to administer
psychometric testing what allows the psychiatrist to complete their analysis of a case.
8. WPI rating purely speculative. The conclusion that the applicant had a 38 percent WPI was completely
wrong, and the report itself was not ratable under the AMA Guides. The main reason is that this
physician, despite his being a licensed QME in good standing, did not correctly utilize any of the charts,
tables, descriptions, or measurements in the AMA Guides. We have no measurements to determine
the correct ratings for each body part, and using what the physician provided in his report would result
in a purely speculative WPI rating.
Afterword:
This case never made it to the DEU for an advisory rating. If it had, the rater would have not been able to rate
the report and would have had to indicate that the report was unratable. It is uncertain whether the physician
can be trained in time to re-write this report with any meaningful evidentiary value. The parties will have to
Page 6 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
request new QMEs in orthopedic surgery, psychiatry, and urology. The applicant became represented by
counsel, and the WCAB had to intervene to determine what course of action to take to develop the record.
[5] Example #4: Upper Extremity (Shoulders, Wrists, Elbow) Impairment Rating
Facts:
The applicant is a 53-year-old maintenance worker who worked five years for a city’s public works department.
He sustained three specific injuries and claimed a continuous trauma injury to both shoulders, both wrists, and
left elbow. In July 2006, an AME concluded that the applicant reached maximum medical improvement as
follows:
With respect to the right and left shoulders, the patient has undergone resection arthroplasties of both
shoulders at the distal clavicle. Each of these corresponds to 10% upper extremity impairment. Using the
Combined Values Chart on page 604, combining these two 10% impairments totals 19% upper extremity
impairment.
With respect to the left elbow cubital tunnel release, this actually was an ulnar nerve release. Page 492,
Table 16-15, lists an ulnar nerve (above mid-forearm) as the appropriate nerve that is involved in this
procedure. The maximum percentage of the upper extremity impairment due to sensory deficit or pain
according to this table is 7% and the maximum impairment of motor deficit is 46%. The patient does not
have a maximum deficit; and, in fact, has had a good surgical result but is left with some residual loss of
muscle strength as evidenced by his slightly decreased grip strength compared to his previous examination
and also some description of subjective pain. Therefore, I would assign using Table 16-10, page 482, and
Table 16-11, page 484, a Grade IV classification for the sensory and motor function. The percentage of
sensory deficit corresponding to Grade IV I would assign is 25% and the percentage of motor deficit using
Grade IV I would assign is also 25%. These percentages of 25% are then used to multiply times the
maximum percentage of deficit for the sensory and motor deficits listed in Table 16-15. Therefore,
multiplying 25% times 7% for the sensory deficit of the ulnar nerve gives us a total of 2%. 25% times 46%
for the motor deficit gives a total of 11.5% which is rounded off to 12%.
Using the Combined Values Chart on page 604, the combination of motor and sensory deficit for the left
elbow of 12% and 2% gives a 14% upper extremity impairment.
For the bilateral carpal tunnel syndromes the patient has also had a good surgical result but is left with
some minor sensory deficit and loss of motor strength as well. Using Table 16-15, page 492, and the
median nerve (below mid-forearm) is utilized. The same grades of Grade IV are assigned to both the motor
and sensory deficits and the same corresponding percentages of 25% deficits are used. The maximum
sensory impairment for the median nerve is 39% and the motor is 10%. Therefore, 25% times 39% is
9.75%, rounded to 10%; and 25% of 10% is 3%. Using the Combined Values Chart on page 604, 10% and
3% are combined to 13% upper extremity impairment. The same impairment rationale is applied to the
right side, and therefore, 10% sensory impairment combined with 3% motor impairment is a 13% upper
extremity impairment for the right wrist.
Combining 13% for the left wrist and 13% for the right wrist for the bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, as well
as the 14% for the left elbow and 19% for the bilateral shoulders using the Combined Values Chart is as
follows: 13% and 13% for the wrists is 24% upper extremity impairment; 24% combined with the 14% left
elbow is 35%; 35% combined with the 19% bilateral shoulders is 47% upper extremity impairment.
Table 16-3, page 439 then converts 47% upper extremity impairment to 28% whole person impairment
rating.
Commentary:
This report is AMA compliant, due in large part to the AME’s 25 years of experience with performing evaluations
under the AMA Guides for Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act cases:
Page 7 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
1. Ulnar nerve and median nerve deficits separately graded. The AME used the correct tables in the
AMA Guides and separately graded the ulnar nerve deficits (from the left elbow cubital tunnel
syndrome) from the median nerve deficits (from the bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome wrist injuries).
2. Sensory/pain and motor deficits separately graded. The AME separately graded sensory/pain deficits
from motor deficits.
3. Rationale provided for each grade. The AME explained his rationale for determining the grade given to
each sensory and motor deficit.
4. ADLs properly addressed. Earlier in his report, the AME explained how the applicant’s impairments
affected his activities of daily living by stating that they were not that affected since he had a fairly good
result from the shoulder and wrist surgeries.
The AME could have done a better job describing his reason for assigning a 10% upper extremity rating for
each shoulder on the basis of the surgical procedure only. The applicant’s shoulder ranges of motion were
normal post surgically.
The AME did not use the upper extremity summary charts, Figures 16-1a and 16-1b, pages 436 and 437,
respectively, in the AMA Guides, which would have made the report easier to read and understand.
Afterword:
The point of this example is to show you the complexity of these reports and the details the physician must
indicate in order for the report to be AMA compliant. In a similar case, the AME erroneously graded the sensory
and motor impairments for carpal tunnel syndrome using Table 16-15, page 492, by grading the ulnar nerve
rather than the median nerve. The rating was 8% WPI higher than it should have been had the AME properly
graded the median nerve sensory and motor deficits.
[6] Example #5: Lumbar Spine, Thoracic Spine, and Hip Impairment Ratings
Facts:
A 36-year-old bartender/food server sustained injuries to her thoracic and lumbar spine and right hip when she
lifted a heavy tray of food and heard a “crunch” sound. MRI revealed focal annular tears at L4-5 and L5-S1 and
2-3 mm disc bulges at L3-4, L4-5, and L5-S1. Using computerized range of motion testing, the applicant had
significant restricted ranges of motion in her lumbar and thoracic spine and both hips.
After declaring the applicant permanent and stationary and MMI, the evaluating QME gave work restrictions
under the 1997 Rating Schedule (no heavy work and no very prolonged weight bearing) and indicated the
following:
The JTECH computerized range of motion system was utilized to gauge range of motion with the use of a
computer for the thoracic spine, lumbar spine and hips. However, it should be noted that the JTECH
system is not always applicable to the spine or lower extremities, as the DRE or other method of
assessment may be used. The JTECH examination summary revels that the Applicant has a 3% WPI of
the thoracic spine, a 9% WPI of the lumbar spine and a 4% WPI of the right hip and a 4% WPI of the left
hip.
Impairment ratings according to the AMA 5th Edition are as follows: With respect to the thoracic spine,
there is a 0% WPI based upon a DRE Category I rating. With respect to the lumbar spine, there is spasm
at rest and with motion on clinical examination. These findings fit the criteria for the DRE Category II
method of impairment (Table 15-3, page 384). Given the degree of limitation of her activities of dialing
living, she is assessed at 5% WPI (5% to 8% possible). With respect to the right hip, there is 0% WPI. (The
contralateral, uninvolved left hip has 10% lower extremity impairment, as does the right hip, therefore,
there is no remaining impairment on the right). She has a total of 5% WPI.
The QME was asked about the inconsistency between the JTECH range of motion ratings and his findings of a
5% WPI using the DRE method, and why he did not use the ROM method for the lumbar spine since there is
more than one level of pathology within that sub-region. The QME responded as follows:
Page 8 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
Since I used the DRE method of impairment, which will most often differ from the range of motion method,
there is no true inconsistency in my findings. There is an inconsistency between the AMA Guides WPI
rating according to the range of motion method as compared to the DRE method of rating spinal
impairment.
There are other reasons for inconsistencies between actual ratings in reports and the JTECH examination
summary findings. The JTECH examination system which I use does not recognize interpolating between
ratings on for example, wrist pie charts. That must be done manually. The JTECH examination system
measures and adds impairment for both sides, when in fact, there are times when this should not be done,
as according to the Guides on page 453, “If a contralateral ‘normal’ joint has less than average mobility, the
impairment value(s) corresponding to the uninvolved joint can serve as a baseline and are subtracted from
the calculated impairment for the involved joint.” In those cases, the contralateral side is subtracted in my
actual report and a wide variance may be seen between my rating and the JTECH “rating,” however, that
does not imply in any way lack of credibility of the system. It is in fact, if I understand correctly, the JTECH
system is the only licensed computerized system for evaluation of WPI by the American Medical
Association. The JTECH is merely recording range of motion measurements for either subtraction, adding
or combining. I verify all impairment ratings cited by the JTECH system with the Guides. When there is a
conflict, the information contained in the Guides apply.
… [W]hat is actually wrong with the patient may not be represented accurately with the AMA Guides. For
example, an injured worker with soft tissue injuries, which may be credibly very long standing, may
ultimately receive a 0% WPI ratings according to the AMA Guides 5th Edition. The medical literature
supports this notion, although long-lasting soft tissue injuries are not the norm, however, these types of
injuries occur regularly.
In this case, the Applicant has annular tears at two levels of the lumbar spine and receives only a 5% WPI
rating, assigned the lowest rating as a result of her stated lack of degree of limitation of her ADLs.
However, these tears do represent compromise of the spine and the ROM method would be considered
given the interpretation of Labor Code § 3202 which gives an injured worker the benefit of the doubt under
liberal construction of the law in favor of granting benefits, so that this Applicant's WPI rating is more in line
with her findings.
So that the parties have a choice of ratings, I will amend my permanent and stationary report dated 5/24/06
to include range of motion methods for the thoracic spine and lumbar spine. The ratings are clear from the
JTECH examination summary; a 9% WPI for the lumbar spine rating is applied and a 3% WPI rating for the
thoracic spine is applied for a combined total of 12% spine WPI.
The right hip, as stated in my permanent and stationary report, has the exact impairment rating of the left
hip, which results in 0% WPI for the injured right hip. There is no historical or medical record evidence or
other impairing condition for the left hip and the Guides do read, as noted above, that one must use as a
baseline the contralateral, uninjured joint. If the patient did not disclose to me a prior injury to the left hip, or
has a condition of which I was not aware or if the patient has had pain complaints to the left hip of unknown
etiology, then the left hip would not be considered an uninjured, uninvolved joint and the 10% lower
extremity impairment which converts to 4% WPI (Table 17-3, page 527) would also apply. Should the right
hip rating apply, it, combined with the spine rating would equate to 16% WPI.
Commentary:
These two medical reports constitute substantial medical evidence and are AMA compliant:
1. DRE method applicable for medical condition caused by an injury. The QME originally used the
DRE method because the AMA Guides Chapter 15, The Spine, literally says to use the DRE method if
the condition is caused by an “injury.” This case involved a specific injury.
2. WPI rating for lumbar spine using ROM method was correct. The QME’s WPI ratings using the ROM
method were correct based upon the measurements compared with normal spinal range of motion
(normal range of motion for lumbar spine: +60 degrees for flexion, 25 degrees for extension, 25
degrees each for right and left lateral flexion).
Page 9 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
3. Applicability of ROM method for lumbar spine noted. However, the QME also indicated that the ROM
method may apply since the applicant had annular tears at two levels within the lumbar spine. Note
that the QME stated that the AMA Guides do not list “annular tears” as any kind of condition within
Table 15-7, page 404, for the ROM spinal disorders. A WCJ could interpret an annular tear as a “soft
tissue lesion” under that description since the AMA Guides indicates no definition of that condition and
requires an analysis of the condition by analogy. This QME is agreeing with such an analysis.
4. Computerized ROM systems addressed. The QME explained the use of computerized range of motion
measuring systems and their limitations. What is important here is that the physician ultimately decided
the actual WPI rating that should fit this case [see #5, below].
NOTE:
The point the QME makes about the limitations of the JTECH or any other kind of computerized
measurement system is that no one can cross-examine the computer or its software. The QME or
treating physician who uses one of these systems had better be prepared to independently justify the
measurements, descriptions, and conclusions with respect to an injured worker’s WPI. Do the
computerized systems truly reflect the applicant’s impairments and the effect of those impairments on
the applicant’s ADLs? Do these systems substitute for the physician’s own intuition and knowledge of
the AMA Guides and how they apply to California workers’ compensation cases? ■
5. Rationale provided for lumbar spine WPI rating. Note how the QME justified why he assigned a rating
within a DRE category based upon the effect of the injury on the applicant’s ADLs. He stated his
rationale for the lower level of a 5% WPI. However, the ROM method resulted in a 9% WPI. Which one
applied? The QME suggested that the WCJ apply Labor Code § 3202 and use the higher rating
because it was more fair to this applicant, who has two levels within the lumbar spine that have annular
tears. Most orthopedic surgeons will tell you that annular tears are the first step towards a herniated
nucleus pulposus.
NOTE:
This case calls for judicial interpretation of the criteria used in the AMA Guides for determining whether
the DRE or ROM method applies in a case where there is a significant discrepancy between the
ratings. The applicant will argue Labor Code § 3202 and the pathology at two levels within a sub-region
of the spine to justify use of the ROM method for the lumbar spine, while the defendant will argue for
use of the DRE method since the lumbar condition was caused by a specific “injury.” ■
NOTE:
The case also illustrates how you can have a case in which the ROM method applies to one sub-region
of the spine (here, lumbar spine) and the DRE method applies to another sub-region (here, thoracic
spine). ■
6. Rationale provided for right hip WPI rating. The QME gave a WPI for the right hip even though he
deferred to the WCJ to determine whether the rating of 4% WPI would hold up based upon the
applicant’s history with respect to her “uninjured” left hip. It is probable that the loss of range of motion
in both hips are anatomical and not related to this injury, but the QME is allowing development of facts
to see if there is a link between the condition on the right side and the injury.
Page 10 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
7. Thoracic spine rating was correct. The thoracic spine rating (DRE) was correct since there is no
pathology at multiple levels within the thoracic sub-region like there is in the lumbar spine, which,
arguably as stated above, should be ROM and not DRE.
Afterword:
This case went to trial on the issue of which spinal impairment rating method applies—DRE or ROM. The WCJ
originally issued rating instructions using the DRE method, resulting in a 5% WPI rating. The applicant’s
attorney objected to the rating instructions, and after the WCJ reviewed the instructions in the AMA Guides
concerning the use of ROM or DRE, the rating instructions were changed to reflect the ROM method. The judge
issued a final award of 12% permanent disability based upon a 9% WPI rating using the ROM method. For a
detailed discussion on how to develop the record in spinal injury cases such as this, see Ch. 4, § 4.13, of this
guidebook for developing the record to obtain accurate ratings.
[7] Example #6: Lower Extremity (Patella Fracture) Impairment Rating
Facts:
The applicant, 58 years old, while employed as a janitor at a hospital, slipped on some plastic wrap and
sustained a 5 mm displaced fracture of his left patella. After open reduction and internal fixation with two pins,
and post surgical physical therapy, the applicant was declared permanent and stationary and MMI by his
treating physician.
The patella fracture was reduced to its anatomical position by the surgery with thigh circumference 41 cm on
the left injured versus 44 cm on the right uninjured. Calf circumference is 31 cm on the left, 32 cm on the right.
Therefore, there is a 3 cm atrophy on the left thigh and 1 cm atrophy on the left calf. Flexion and extension of
the left knee is normal 0-135 degrees.
There is mild quad atrophy and very mild calf atrophy with a minimal loss of flexion and minimal loss of
strength. The patient continues to work, stand, squat, and climb up and down stairs with “some occasional pain
with extremes of standing” [sic]. The motor examination is 5/5 for the quadriceps. The physician states as
follows:
According to the AMA Guides and utilizing the anticipated impairment, utilizing Table 17-33, the patient’s
impairment currently is commensurate with a displaced patella fracture, healed. Accordingly, his lower
extremity impairment is 7%, WPI is 3%. Accordingly, based on his mild subjective complaints and his
current objective findings, I believe this is a fair representation of his current impairment. Given the fact that
the patient did have a patella fracture he is at risk for patella problems in the future including patellofemoral
syndrome and patella arthritis.
Commentary:
This medical report is AMA compliant. However, it is on the conservative side, and as stated below, did pass
scrutiny as substantial evidence in this case. The steps to confirm the physician’s findings are as follows:
1. Review Table 17-2, page 526, of the AMA Guides. This table indicates what combination of the 13 [see
Table 17-1, page 525] ways to rate lower extremity impairments applies in this case.
NOTE:
Attorneys, judges, and claims adjusters must become familiar with the 13 ways to evaluate lower
extremity ratings and learn to recognize from medical reports whether all of the information has been
provided by the physician to properly and fairly evaluate a lower extremity case. ■
2. Review Table 17-6, page 530, of the AMA Guides. This table indicates that the atrophy for the thigh is
3 cm, which is a 5% WPI, along with the 1 cm atrophy for the calf, which is a 1% WPI, which combines
to a 6% WPI rating. After adjustment for FEC, age, and occupation, the permanent disability rating
would be 10%.
Page 11 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
3. Determine if muscle weakness of knee joint was measured by physician. If muscle weakness of the
knee joint existed, it would be 25%, grade 4 (5% WPI) for flexion, and 25%, grade 4 (5% WPI) for
extension, which combined would be a 10% WPI based upon Tables 17-7, page 531, and 17-8, page
532, of the AMA Guides.
NOTE:
An applicant’s attorney would argue that if this physician failed to test for muscle weakness, the report
may not be substantial evidence since muscle weakness is a common result from fractures, disuse,
and/or atrophy. ■
NOTE:
This case was similar to Example 17-5, page 532, of the AMA Guides, which happens to be the same
page as Table 17-8, page 532, for impairments to the lower extremity because of muscle weakness. ■
4. Review Table 17-33, pages 546–547, of the AMA Guides. This physician believed that the DBE
(Diagnosis Based Estimate) is the best way to evaluate this case. According to Table 17-33, pages
546–547, the DBE method cannot be combined with any rating for muscle strength or atrophy, so the
result of 7% lower extremity rating stands alone. The 7% lower extremity rating is converted to a 3%
WPI rating, which results in a 5% permanent disability rating after adjustment for FEC, age, and
occupation.
Afterword:
This case involved an applicant who was not represented by legal counsel. The case was informally rated by
the DEU prior to submission of the case to the WCJ. The DEU rater used the WPI rating based upon the thigh
and calf atrophy as the basis for the final rating of 10% permanent disability, since it was greater than the DBE
method of rating. The WCJ approved a submitted Stipulation With Request for Award for a 10% permanent
disability.
Since the treating physician warned about post traumatic arthritis, it may have been reasonable to test the
applicant for that condition, as well as muscle weakness on knee flexion, extension, and atrophy, before any
settlement was approved. The arthritic condition could be separately rated and combined with the DBE rating,
according to Table 17-2, page 526, of the AMA Guides. In fact, Table 17-31, page 544, is the arthritis
impairment reference, which can be combined with the DBE rating method, but cannot be combined with
muscle strength loss or atrophy. In Table 17-31, page 544, the following asterisked statement appears: “In an
individual with a history of direct trauma, a complaint of patellofemoral pain, and crepitation on physical
examination but without joint space narrowing on X-rays, a 2% WPI or 5% lower extremity impairment is given.”
This case reflects how the WCJ, with some advice from a DEU rater, can choose which method(s) to rate a
lower extremity impairment case. The more familiar everyone is with Table 17-2, page 526, of the AMA Guides
and the different methods of evaluating lower extremity impairments, the fairer the ratings for these injuries will
be. The rater here chose the middle ground rating since the physician did not comment too much on muscle
weakness. Besides, the atrophy was much more dramatic a result from this injury than the DBE listed “non-
displaced patella” method of rating.
[8] Example #7: Head Injury Impairment Rating
Facts:
On April 22, 2005, the applicant, a 59-year-old “barista” at a coffee house, was mopping the floor when he
slipped and fell backwards striking the back of his head on the floor. He had a brief loss of consciousness and
was taken to the emergency room in which he was diagnosed as having a contracoup injury to the frontal lobe
Page 12 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
of his cortex. CT and MRI scans were negative, and the applicant was released after a few hours of
observation.
While employed part time as a barista, the applicant was also enrolled in a university’s student teaching
program. After release from the emergency room, the applicant was stable, but suffered from episodic
headaches, dizziness, and nausea. His wife noticed he had some short term memory problems and was
depressed and more irritable than usual. On June 6, 2005, the applicant was walking down stairs at home to go
to school when he felt “funny.” He sat on the bottom stair, and the next thing he remembered was four days
later when he “woke up” in the hospital. He was diagnosed with a subdural hematoma and hygroma that
occurred in the left frontal cortex as diagnosed by CT and MRI scans.
The applicant was initially placed on Depakote (an anti seizure medication), which his stomach did not tolerate,
and then Keppra, on which he maintains. The applicant continued to have unpredictable episodes of dizziness,
headaches, short term memory loss, depression, and irritability. While his college grades and studies kept up,
he was ejected from two separate student teaching assignments because of inappropriate behavior towards the
students. He was compliant with taking his medication.
In January 2006, the applicant was examined by an AME in neurology. In his report, the AME opined that the
applicant was permanent and stationary and also stated:
The applicant has no permanent disability, no work restrictions and he is 90% better  …  the applicant
needs future medical treatment by taking Keppra but the episodic headaches, dizziness and short term
memory problems will resolve within the next year. The formal diagnosis is post-traumatic epilepsy due to
subdural hematoma or hygroma and post concussion head syndrome. The subdural hematoma/hygroma
was caused by the original slip and fall injury at work.
Commentary:
The report is not AMA compliant and does not constitute substantial evidence. This case illustrates how
attorneys need to develop the record in AMA Guides cases in order to obtain substantial medical evidence
when the record is inadequate.
1. Cross-examination of AME indicated problems with his report. At the AME’s deposition, it was
established that:
a. The applicant was not permanent and stationary, and any future improvement of symptoms was
speculative.
b. There should have been neuropsychological testing at the time of permanent and stationary/MMI
status to see if there were any cognitive deficits.
c. Applicant’s behavior, which led to his dismissals from student teaching assignments, may have been
due to “disinhibition” caused by the original head injury.
d. The AME did not have any formal training on the AMA Guides except for a three-hour, brief overview
of SB 899 that occurred a year ago.
e. The AME was unaware of an incident involving the applicant that occurred after he wrote his report.
On March 6, 2006, the applicant had taken a shower at home and while cleaning the inside shower
door with a squeegee, the applicant bent down, became extremely dizzy, straightened up, and fell
backwards, striking the back of his head against the shower wall and lacerating his scalp.
Paramedics were called, but he declined to be transported to the hospital. His neurologist
examined him the next day and told him to stay on his Keppra. After informing the AME about the
shower incident, the AME opined that there needed to be a repeat MRI scan of the brain to assess
the hygroma, along with an EEG, to see if there were any sub-clinical seizures. In addition,
neuropsychological testing would be essential to determine any cognitive deficits.
2. AME was not familiar with AMA Guides sections on vestibular disorders. The AME was not familiar
with AMA Guides, Chapter 11, Section 11.2b and Table 11-4, page 253, vestibular disorders, and that
the applicant may have a post concussion head syndrome that includes positional station deficits.
Page 13 of 13
§ 4.04 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Examples of AMA Compliant and Non-AMA Complaint Medical
Reports
Afterword:
The applicant was subsequently referred to an AME in neuropsychology, who tested the applicant and opined
that he had a slight post concussion head syndrome, post traumatic epilepsy, and major depression with a
probable personality disorder (due to a spotty and inconsistent work history since 1994). According to this AME
in neuropsychology, the applicant had reached MMI and had a residual GAF score of 50, which corresponded
to a WPI rating of 30% (based upon the 2005 PDRS, pages 1-12 through 1-16). He opined that 40% of the WPI
was directly caused by the industrial head trauma and that 60% was caused by a pre-existing personality
disorder and a previous well documented history of depression. Therefore, the applicant had a 12% WPI rating
for the cognitive disorder caused by the head trauma after apportionment. This rating did not include any rating
from Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides, which rating needs to be independently determined by the AME in
neurology as to any permanent impairment due to the subdural hematoma/hygroma conditions.
NOTE:
The AME in neurology needs to follow the step-by-step analysis in the AMA Guides, Chapter 13,
Section 13.2, as well as Tables 13-3, page 312, 13-4, page 317, 13-5, page 320, 13-6, page 320, 13-7,
page 323, and 13-8, page 325, for each of the components of a central nervous system injury like this
one. Those tables cover which conditions can be combined with a central nervous system impairment
after choosing the highest WPI ratings from: (1) Table 13-2, page 309, criteria for rating impairment
due to consciousness and awareness; (2) Table 13-3, page 312, criteria for rating impairment due to
episodic loss of consciousness or awareness; (3) Table 13-4, page 317, sleep and arousal disorders;
(4) Table 13-5, page 320, clinical dementia rating with Table 13-6, page 320, mental status impairment;
(5) Table 13-7, page 323, aphasia or dysphasia; and (6) Table 13-8, page 325, emotional or behavioral
disorders. ■
The subsequent brain MRI and EEG showed no changes from the prior neurological examinations, and it was
agreed that, as a result of the industrial head trauma, the applicant had a Class I, 14% WPI rating for
Impairment Due to Episodic Loss of Consciousness or Awareness, Table 13-3, page 312, of the AMA Guides
(“Paroxysmal disorder with predictable characteristics and unpredictable occurrence that does not limit usual
activities but is a risk to the individual or limits daily activities”). The rationale for this rating on the high end of
Category I (0%–14% WPI) was that this applicant had recurrent seizure activity even while compliant with his
medication schedule, but with some minor effects on his ADLs.
The cognitive rating of 12% WPI (from the psychiatric component) was rated separately for FEC, occupation,
and age from the 1 4% WPI rating for the brain injury, which was also rated for FEC, occupation, and age. The
final calculated permanent disability rating for each was then combined for a final permanent disability rating,
which resulted in a 31% permanent disability award.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.05
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.05 Establishing Accurate WPI Ratings
We are learning from our experience with the AMA Guides in workers’ compensation cases that physicians read
and interpret the AMA Guides differently than an attorney would read and interpret them. Physicians are utilizing the
AMA Guides’ tables, figures, and methods with great variation between physicians and with varying amounts of
expertise and familiarity with the AMA Guides. Many physicians are using a literal interpretation of the tables,
figures and methods of the AMA Guides while other physicians are using a liberal interpretation of the language and
descriptions in the AMA Guides.
Moreover, attorneys read the same language in the AMA Guides that physicians do with different interpretations all
together. For example, what does the word “injury” mean in Chapter 15, The Spine? How do you interpret Table 15-
7 Sections II B and C and the use of the term “soft-tissue lesion?” Do you use the ROM method in a spinal injury
case instead of the DRE method if two annular tears or bulging discs are within the same sub-region of the spine,
e.g. lumbar? The Guides indicate you use the ROM method if there is “pathology” or “soft-tissue lesions” at multiple
levels within a sub-region of the spine even though the Guides also tell us to use the DRE method if the impairment
is caused by an “injury.” See Ch. 3, § 3.15 of this guidebook for a complete discussion of the issue of which spinal
impairment method applies-DRE or ROM?
The purpose of this chapter is to show that in order to get an accurate permanent disability rating, counsel needs to
develop the record in all AMA Guides cases by reading the instructions in the AMA Guides and making sure
physicians applied the descriptions and measurements in the Guides properly and consistently with those
instructions and with the 2005 PDRS. Physicians rely too much on chapters and sections in the AMA Guides that
pertain to their medical specialties but do not read the instructions in the Guides, nor do they apply other relevant
chapters in the Guides in their analysis of impairments in these cases.
This chapter discusses some controversial issues in AMA Guides cases, the resolution of which may require judicial
determinations and appellate law. However, the discussion of these issues may give you some skills in how to
develop the record so that an accurate rating can be established in a case. The best message in this chapter for
attorneys and judges is very simple-read the instructions in the Guides!
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.06
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.06 Justification for Use of the Guides in Workers’ Compensation Cases
There is an inherent conflict between the statute that mandates use of the AMA Guides and the instructions in AMA
Guides Chapter 1. Labor Code § 4660(b)(1) states:
The “nature of the physical injury or disfigurement” shall incorporate the descriptions and measurements of
physical impairments and the corresponding percentages of impairments published in the [AMA] Guides to the
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment 5th Edition.
But then, in the AMA Guides, page 9, Section 1.2b, the authors of the Guides state:
The Guides is not intended to be used for direct estimates of work disability. Impairment percentages derived
according to the Guides criteria do not measure work disability. Therefore, it is inappropriate to use the Guides’
criteria or ratings to make direct estimates of work disability.
AMA Guides Chapter 1 also goes on to say in different places that the Guides do not account for a person’s
education, experience, knowledge, skills, or abilities in performing work activities and that the AMA Guides only
account for basic activities of daily living, not including work.
Despite the cautionary language, the AMA Guides are currently being used in 47 states in their respective workers’
compensation systems. In most, if not all 47 states, interested parties have challenged the use of the AMA Guides
in workers’ compensation systems indicating that the authors of the Guides did not intend them to be used in
workers’ compensation systems. None of these challenges have been successful. In California, no one has legally
challenged the use of the AMA Guides as mandated by Labor Code § 4660(b)(1) because the legislature is able to
adopt any kind of method for determining entitlement to workers’ compensation benefits as long as the method is
consistent with the constitutional mandate [see Calif. Const., Art. XIV § IV].
In California, our legislature has indicated that there has to be more than just the use of the descriptions and
measurements of the AMA Guides to determine permanent disability. Labor Code § 4660 sets forth the framework
of developing a permanent disability rating schedule that takes into account a person’s loss of future earning
capacity that is based upon empirical data and updated every five years with impairment ratings used from the AMA
Guides. This statutory mandate was challenged and that challenge was rejected by the WCAB in Costa v. Hardy
Diagnostic [(2006) 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1797 (Appeals Board en banc opinion)].
California law mandates more than the simple use of the AMA Guides to determine a person’s eligibility for
permanent disability benefits. First, we have the constitutional mandate to provide “substantial justice in every case
expeditiously, inexpensively and without encumbrances” along with liberal construction that implements the
constitutional mandate under Labor Code § 3202. Secondly, we have the 2005 PDRS that automatically raises the
impairment ratings from the AMA Guides due to the FEC adjustment [see Ch. 1 of this guidebook]. Under legislation
that passed in 2012, we also have the 2013 PDRS that applies to injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 that
eliminates the FEC adjustment and substitutes one adjustment factor of 1.4. For injuries occurring on or after
1/1/2013, you use the 2005 PDRS to adjust occupation and age for a rating until the Administrative Director adopts
a new 2013 schedule. See Chs. 2 and 5 of this guidebook for an explanation of how to calculate a rating.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Page 2 of 2
§ 4.06 Justification for Use of the Guides in Workers’ Compensation Cases
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.07
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.07 Development of the Record Using AMA Guides Chapters 1 and 2
Experience is showing that many physicians, despite being involved in medical practices for many years, even
decades, are not reading and becoming familiar with the AMA Guides as a whole document. Depositions of treating
physicians, QMEs, and AMEs reveal that individual physicians only read the charts, tables, and figures that pertain
to his or her specific medical practice, with some of them ignoring the very instructions that govern their own
specialty.
In addition, physicians are not reading any of the other chapters in the Guides. In one deposition, a world renowned
orthopedic surgeon testified that he only is familiar with the shoulder, knee, and elbow “sections” in the Guides.
Upon further questioning, it was clear that the physician did not even know that the elbow, shoulder, and knees
were in separate chapters in the Guides (the knees are in AMA Guides Chapter 17, the shoulder and elbow are in
AMA Guides Chapter 16).
When you take the deposition of a physician in an AMA Guides case, be sure that the physician has read and is
familiar with all of the following information:
A. Chapters 1 and 2 of the AMA Guides.
1. Familiarity with Section 2.6, pages 21–22 of the AMA Guides
2. How does an impairment affect the person’s ADLs in Table 1-2 on Page 4 of the AMA Guides?
3. The rationale for the physician’s conclusions about which category or which class of impairment a person
falls into and which rating within a category or class does the person have? (For example, in a lumbar
spine case, stating that “The patient has a DRE Category II, 5% impairment rating” is not substantial
evidence. Why did the physician use the DRE method instead of the ROM method? Why is it DRE II and
not DRE III? Why is it 5% and not 6%, 7%, or 8%?)
B. The instructions on the use of the 2005 PDRS and confirmation that the 2005 PDRS and its instructions,
except for the FEC adjustments, apply to injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013.
1. How a permanent disability rating is determined from an impairment rating
2. How pain add ons are determined on page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS
Chapters 1 and 2 of the AMA Guides provide a framework for physicians to utilize AMA Guides Chapters 3–18, and
if a physician is not familiar with these two chapters, then his or her medical report runs a very high risk of not being
“AMA compliant” and probably does not constitute substantial medical evidence.
In addition, physicians need to become familiar with the 2005 PDRS, not for purposes of how to calculate a
permanent disability rating from a WPI rating, but to develop at least a rudimentary understanding of how the rating
process occurs and to especially becoming familiar with the rules governing pain add-ons pursuant to Page 1-12 of
the 2005 PDRS and the requirement for separate ratings for different body parts when there are separate FEC
adjustments for injuries occurring prior to 1/1/2013.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 2 of 2
§ 4.07 Development of the Record Using AMA Guides Chapters 1 and 2
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.08
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.08 Population Averages
AMA Guides Chapter 1 indicates that when a physician examines a person, the measurements for that person can
be compared to population averages that are listed in various places in the Guides. Almost every chapter in the
AMA Guides provide tables and figures that show population averages for such things as ranges of motion,
strength, weight, and other physical attributes. For example, normal population averages for flexion and extension
of the wrist joint is 60 degrees for flexion and 60 degrees for extension [see AMA Guides Chapter 16, The Upper
Extremities, Figures 16-26 and 16-28 on pages 466–467].
However, there is enough individual variation that sometimes using population averages are not a fair or accurate
way to determine an impairment rating. Some individuals, such as athletes or piano players, have normal wrist
extension and flexion of 75 degrees for each range of motion. An injury to one wrist where the residual range of
motion for flexion and extension is 60 degrees each on the injured side and 75 degrees on the uninjured side would
indicate that there is no impairment if you look at normal wrist flexion and extension ranges of motion in AMA
Guides Chapter 16 that are based on population averages.
However, the instructions in the AMA Guides Chapter 1 indicate that a physician can determine an impairment
rating by comparing an injured side to the contra-lateral uninjured side. In the example above, a physician would not
use the Figures and Tables for population averages in AMA Guides Chapter 16 but would determine an impairment
rating based upon the loss of range of motion comparing an injured side to the uninjured side. So the athlete or
piano player would have a 20% loss of motion for wrist flexion and extension if you compare the residual loss of
range of motion of the injured side versus the uninjured side.
One note about upper extremity cases is in order here. Many physicians are using a computer program to calculate
impairment ratings for upper extremity cases. A word of caution is in order for the use of those computer generated
impairment ratings for upper extremities. The commercial computer programs in use today do not account for
variations in population averages for upper extremity range of motion testing. So a computer would indicate that the
athlete or piano player in the example above would not have any impairment. Also, computer programs cannot
interpolate an impairment rating that falls between two points on a pie chart. The computer would default to a higher
or lower “listed” rating, and the rating would not be accurate.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.09
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.09 Age or Gender Related Impairments
The AMA Guides indicate in Chapter 1 and other chapters, including Chapter 15, The Spine, that the medical
literature does not clearly support the notion that gender or age can be a factor in determining an impairment rating
that is strictly due to the aging process or the gender of the person being evaluated. The Guides instructions
indicate that there is too much variability within the elderly and between the genders to reliably calculate those
factors in an impairment rating. The AMA Guides are completely silent on such issues of how obesity or other
population factors affect an impairment rating, if at all. The reason is because the AMA Guides is a consensus
document, and there is no consensus in the literature or among physicians about the role of aging, genders, or
obesity in determining an impairment rating.
The only exceptions are the respiratory tables for normal and gender based pulmonary function in AMA Guides
Chapter 5 and the tables for normal hearing function in AMA Guides Chapter 11 that indicate normal population
changes due to the aging process.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.10
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.10 Use of Clinical Judgment
As stated earlier in Chapter 1 of this guidebook, there are many medical conditions that are not listed or included in
the AMA Guides. Medical conditions such as osteochondritis, neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome, epicondylitis,
myofacial pain, fibromyalgia, plantar fasciitis, chostrochondritis, and piriformis muscle syndrome are but a few
medical conditions that we see in our workers’ compensation cases from time to time but are not given impairment
ratings in the AMA Guides.
There are instructions provided in Chapter 1 of the AMA Guides that allow the evaluating physician to indicate
impairment ratings for medical conditions that are not listed in the Guides based upon an analogy to listed and rated
medical conditions that are similar to the un-rated ones and which result in similar impairments. Counsel should
refer to the actual instructions in AMA Guides Chapter 1, Section 1.5, page 11, for unlisted impairments, which
reads:
The Guides nonetheless provides a framework for evaluating new or complex conditions …. In situations where
impairment ratings are not provided, the Guides suggest that physicians use clinical judgment, comparing
measurable impairments resulting from the unlisted condition to measurable impairment resulting from similar
conditions with similar impairment of function in performing activities of daily living.
Attorneys should become familiar with this language in the instructions in Chapter 1 of the Guides since many work-
related injuries result in medical conditions that are not listed or rated for impairments in the Guides. Counsel will
need to develop the record by interrogatory or deposition of treating and evaluating physicians in order to determine
whether an unlisted medical condition is properly rated for impairment when that condition is not considered in the
AMA Guides even though the condition does affect a person’s activities of daily living.
Remember, the term “clinical judgment” or “best clinical judgment” is a medical term. The practice of medicine is as
much an art as it is a science. When a physician is using clinical judgment, he or she is utilizing the art of medicine
more than the science of medicine—clinical judgment means that the physician uses his or her own knowledge,
experience, education, skill, ability and intuition to come to a medical conclusion, with reasonable medical
probability, about a medical condition’s diagnosis, course of treatment or prognosis. It can be said that an
impairment rating is a part of the physician’s prognosis for a patient’s medical condition.
In addition, counsel needs to become familiar with a very important section in the instructions for use of the 2005
PDRS. On page 1-4, second column, second paragraph, the 2005 PDRS states:
If an impairment based on an objective medical condition is not addressed by the AMA Guides, physicians
should use clinical judgment, comparing measurable impairment resulting from the unlisted objective medical
condition to measurable impairment resulting from similar objective medical conditions with similar impairment
of function in performing activities of daily living. (AMA Guides, page 11).
This section can and should be used by counsel in joint letters to agreed medical examiners, panel QME physicians
and treating physicians, along with deposition testimony of physicians, because chances are the physicians have
not read the instructions in the 2005 PDRS. These instructions apply to all dates of injury on or after 1/1/2013 as
well as under the 2005 PDRS.
Page 2 of 2
§ 4.10 Use of Clinical Judgment
Compare the wording of this instruction with the actual language quoted above directly from page 11 of the AMA
Guides. The language is similar but different in a very important respect. The instruction in the 2005 PDRS
emphasizes the requirement that there must be an “objective medical condition” that results in impairment of
function. The impairment of function can be of activities of daily living and/or of work activities. Once an objective
medical condition exists and causes impairment of function, it should be ratable under the AMA Guides.
Make sure that if you take a physician’s deposition that you establish first whether the injured worker has an
objective medical condition that is work related. Then determine with reasonable medical probability whether the
objective medical condition is causing any impairment of function. If so, then establish what impairment rating within
the 5th edition of the AMA Guides may apply. If there are none, then ask about which impairment rating may apply
using the instructions under the 2005 PDRS. Read the instructions in the 2005 PDRS directly to the physician.
Some counsel are calling this analysis “rating by analogy” but the term is never used in either the 2005 PDRS
instruction or on page 11 of the AMA Guides. Physicians must use their clinical judgment in order to provide the
parties and the WCAB with an accurate rating for an unlisted objective medical condition.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.11
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.11 Practical Applications of the Guides
As stated in Ch. 3, § 3.02 of this guidebook, Chapter 2 of the AMA Guides provides rules for physicians to follow in
applying Chapters 3–17 of the Guides. The authors describe such concepts as “adding” impairments as opposed to
“combining” using the Combined Values Chart. The authors make general statements concerning combining
impairments that do not apply in California workers’ compensation cases.
For example, in upper extremity cases, the authors of Chapter 2 of the AMA Guides instruct the physician to
evaluate upper extremity impairments, combine all of them using the Combined Values Chart and then convert the
total upper extremity impairment rating to whole person by multiplying by 60%. This is contrary to the instructions in
the 2005 PDRS which requires separate ratings for each part of the upper extremity, then each part separately
rated from upper extremity ratings to WPI ratings then converted to permanent disability using each unique
applicable FEC adjustment for each injured part of the upper extremity then combining permanent disability from
the largest rating to the next largest and so on until the entire upper extremity (unilateral or bilateral) is rated with
one overall permanent disability rating.
So, for example, in a shoulder, elbow, wrist and thumb case, the physician must indicate separate upper extremity
ratings for each part and convert each part of the upper extremity into WPI. It is meaningless for the physician in an
upper extremity case, and to a lesser extent in a lower extremity case, to give an overall WPI rating for upper or
lower extremities.
This is because in upper extremity cases, the FEC adjustments are different for each part of the upper extremity,
depending upon the type of impairment involved. For example, the shoulder has an FEC adjustment of [7], the
elbow has an FEC adjustment of [2], the wrist has an FEC adjustment of [4], and the thumb has an FEC adjustment
of [1]. Bilateral conditions are combined by specific part of the upper extremity (e.g., both wrists) then rated to WPI
separately from other singular or bilateral parts of the upper extremity.
The fact that there is a conflict between the instructions in Chapter 2 of the AMA Guides and the 2005 PDRS
illustrates the point that physicians should be familiar with the instructions in the 2005 PDRS even though
physicians are not required to learn how an impairment is rated to permanent disability. If you are asked by a
physician whether the instructions in the 2005 PDRS apply to new injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, the
answer is “yes” since Labor Code § 4660.1 adopts the 2005 PDRS for rating purposes using the occupation and
age modifiers therein.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.12
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.12 Measurements Must Be Reliable
Reliability and verifiability of measurements, which form the basis of a physician’s conclusions that an applicant has
a permanent impairment, is emphasized in Chapter 2 of the AMA Guides. The examiner should be able to conduct
three reliable measurements that are within 10% of each other with the highest rating being the one used by the
physician. For range of motion measurements, a “warm-up” period should be allowed before the actual
measurements are taken by the examining physician. There should be at least six measurements with three
consecutive readings deemed by the examiner to be “reliable.” Reliability means that if the range of motion is
measured, each of the three consecutive measurements should be within 10 degrees of each other if the
measurement is greater than 50 degrees, and within 5 degrees of each other if the measurement is less than 50
degrees.
If there is more than one physician measuring the same body part or function, the impairment ratings from different
examiners should also be within 10% of each other. Despite the language in Chapter 2 of the AMA Guides for
consistency and uniformity between examiners of the same person, there is a great amount of subjectivity built into
the evaluation process, which means we will continue to see a range of evidence between examiners in AMA
Guides cases.
In reality, the reliability of range of motion testing is always suspect, even in the best clinical situations. Active range
of motion is a subjective measurement both by the applicant and by the examiner. Many range of motion testing is
being performed by an assistant to the AME, QME, or treating physician, which renders the entire rating invalid and
probably not substantial evidence. The physician-examiner should be able to indicate whether the applicant is using
maximum effort in performing the active range of motion testing, muscle strength testing, and the like, and the
physician cannot rely on an assistant for these measurements.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.13
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.13 Assistive Devices
Chapter 2 of the AMA Guides indicates that the examiner in most cases should evaluate a patient without the use of
assistive devices if possible. For example, a patient who is using a cane probably can be evaluated without its use,
while a patient with a lens implant will have to be evaluated for vision using the lens in situ. Under the 1997
Schedule, for example, hearing loss was tested with the use of hearing aids, based upon the assumption that a
person does not lose any of his or her ability to compete in the open labor market if hearing aids are provided on an
industrial basis. However, the authors of the Guides indicate that assistive devices are artificial and are not useful in
determining a person’s whole person impairment.
The authors of the Guides indicate that the physician can evaluate a person without the use of assistive devices
and compare the results to any rating the person has with the use of the device. Also, physicians should evaluate
any separate impairment that is caused by the actual use of assistive devices. For example, if a person has to rely
on the use of a cane to walk and that person as a result of putting weight on the hand-arm-shoulder of the side he
or she uses the cane and develops impairment to the hand-arm-shoulder, then that additional impairment is
combined with the lower extremity rating that led to the medically required use of the cane.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.14
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.14 Side Effects of Medication
The Guides direct physicians to include any impairments that are independently caused by the side effects of
medication for a ratable medical condition. For example, a person who develops a peptic or duodenal ulcer from the
use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for a lumbar spine injury would be rated for the spinal
condition under AMA Guides, Chapter 15, The Spine, and Table 6-3 in Chapter 6, The Digestive System. The
separate ratings would be combined using the Combined Values Chart.
Similarly, if a person has atrial fibrillation, the standard treatment for that condition is to prescribe Coumadin, which
is a very powerful anti-coagulant medication, with its basic ingredients used as rat poison. There are potentially
devastating side effects from the use of Coumadin in many cases, and any side effects such as easy bruising,
bleeding and weakness can be rated, In fact, the authors of the AMA Guides in Chapter 2 indicate: “Related but
separate conditions are rated separately and impairment ratings are combined unless criteria for the second
impairment are included in the primary impairment.” See AMA Guides, Chapter 2, Section 2.5, page 19. So in the
case of atrial fibrillation, you would rate the heart arrhythmia under AMA Guides Chapter 3, The Heart, and the side
effects of the Coumadin by analogy to any blood disorder listed in AMA Guides Chapter 9, The Hematopoietic
System, probably thrombocytopenia.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.15
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.15 Spinal Injury Cases—DRE vs. ROM Methods
This section expands on the medical-legal issue of which rating method applies in a spinal injury case. See Ch. 3,
§ 3.15 of this guidebook for a complete discussion of the DRE and ROM methods. Reference is made to Example
#5 in Ch. 4, § 4.04[6] of this guidebook, where the bartender/waitress lifted a heavy tray of food and injured her
lumbar spine, thoracic spine and right hip. The QME indicated that both the DRE and ROM methods apply in this
case for the following reasons:
1. The DRE method applies because the spinal impairment was caused by an “injury”, and the AMA Guides
state that you use the DRE method if the impairment is caused by an injury.
2. The ROM method applies because the applicant has multiple levels of pathology within the sub-region of the
lumbar spine (she has three bulging discs and two adjacent annular tears) and her spinal disorder is
consistent with AMA Guides, Table 15-7, Section II(B), with a “soft-tissue lesion” at multiple levels. Even
though the multiple levels of pathology exist, there is no way any physician can say with reasonable
medical probability which pathology or level is causing the applicant’s impairment.
In this example, if the DRE method applied, the applicant would have a DRE Category II, 5% WPI rating, and if the
ROM method applied, she would have a 9% WPI rating of the lumbar spine. So which rating applies in a case like
this?
There are inconsistent statements within the text of AMA Guides Chapter 15 in reference to when the ROM method
applies and when the DRE method applies. In fact, there is controversy about whether there needs to be a
“radiculopathy” in order for the ROM to apply. In some places, the text indicates that there has to be some form of
radiculopathy for the ROM method to apply, and in the actual spinal disorders rating table (Table 15-7), there is no
such requirement, nor is there any definition of what a “soft-tissue lesion” is. Are bulging discs or annular tears
examples of “soft-tissue lesions?” In addition, there is no definition of the term “injury” in the AMA Guides. The
authors of the Guides never contemplated the California nuance that repetitive or heavy work activities can be a
contributing factor to the onset of the development of an impairment—also known as a continuous trauma “injury.”
This raises the point of controversy. Is the determination of which spinal impairment rating method applies—DRE or
ROM—a medical determination by a physician, a rating determination by a DEU rater, or a legal determination to be
made by a workers’ compensation judge? Remember, WCAB Rule of Practice and Procedure, Rule 10602 creates
the division of labor between a DEU rater and a WCAB trial judge [see 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10602]. Rule 10602
mandates that DEU raters indicate the rating formula based upon instructions from the WCJ and that the DEU rater
does not determine permanent disability. The ultimate determination of a person’s permanent disability is strictly
within the purview and powers of a WCJ only. See the discussion on the role of the rater vs. role of the judge in Ch.
2, § 2.06[4][b], of this guidebook.
In many of our cases, we are receiving informal ratings from the DEU that state in essence “Cannot rate as ROM,
physician should have used DRE.” This creates an unnecessary delay in our obtaining informal ratings to assist the
parties to resolve cases prior to trial. The fact is that since the WCJ ultimately determines permanent disability, the
judge will be the final arbiter of which spinal impairment rating method applies in a given case—DRE or ROM—
because the WCJ has the power to determine permanent disability in each case doing substantial justice in every
case as mandated by the California Constitution, Art. XIV, Section IV.
Page 2 of 3
§ 4.15 Spinal Injury Cases—DRE vs. ROM Methods
In the example above, the bartender/waitress either has a 5% WPI rating under the DRE method or a 9% WPI
based on the ROM method. In a similar case to the one mentioned, here, the WCJ ultimately determined that the
ROM method applied even though the formal rating was 5% as a DRE Category II and the ROM method also rated
9% WPI. In that case, there was a range of evidence within the same medical report because the physician utilized
both methods since he stated in his report that he felt both methods apply in almost every case and the judge
should decide which method best fits the case. The WCJ agreed and chose the ROM method and 9% WPI because
the record had been developed by counsel prior to the trial to show through the physician’s supplemental reporting
that the ROM method fit this case better than the DRE method.
Counsel is reminded that you hold the keys to developing the record in these cases so that the WCJ can weigh the
evidence in favor or against using either the DRE or ROM method in a given case. Use the actual language in the
text of the AMA Guides. For example, in AMA Guides Chapter 15, page 379, the authors state that you use the
ROM method:
When an impairment is not caused by an injury, if the cause of the condition is uncertain and the DRE method
does not apply, or an individual cannot be easily categorized in a DRE class.
What do these terms mean? A physician, a judge, a rater and an attorney may have different interpretations of each
of them. For example, if an individual falls under a DRE Category 1, he or she has a 0% WPI. But if the physician
believes the person should have an impairment rating less than 5% but greater than 0% WPI, then perhaps the
phrase “an individual cannot be easily categorized in a DRE class” may cause one to argue the rating falls under a
“DRE Gap” and that the case should be rated using the ROM method.
The language in the AMA Guides is inconsistent and vague when it comes to when you can use the ROM method.
One school of thought says that there has to be a radiculopathy in order for the ROM method to apply, while the
other school of thought is that there does not need to be a radiculopathy for ROM to be used. The authors of the
AMA Guides on page 380 indicate that you use the ROM method:
When there is multiple involvement in the same spinal region (eg, fractures at multiple levels, disc herniations,
or stenosis with radiculopathy at multiple levels or bilaterally).
On the same page, the authors go on to say:
Use the ROM method if: … (d) there is recurrent disc herniation or stenosis with radiculopathy at the same or
different level in the same spinal region …
Does there have to be a “disc herniation with radiculopathy” or just a recurrent disc herniation for the ROM method
to apply? Does there have to be radiculopathy from multiple level herniations, recurrent herniation at the same
level, or stenosis, or does there only have to be radiculopathy from stenosis and none required for recurrent or
multi-level disc herniations? The raters are instructed to indicate that the ROM method applies in these cases only
when there is radiculopathy, otherwise they are instructed to use the DRE method. This is a strict interpretation of
the language in the AMA Guides, and the WCJ in the example above overruled the rater, explaining why the ROM
applied in the case instead of the DRE method.
To add to the confusion, when you apply the ROM method, the first step after deciding to use the ROM method
requires you to rate the case under Table 15-7, page 404 of the AMA Guides, the spinal disorder rating (and then
you combine that rating with the range of motion rating and combine that with the neurological ratings, if any). Table
15-7 provides under Section II(B):
Intervertebral disk or other soft tissue lesions … Unoperated on, with medically documented injury, pain and
rigidity associated with none to minimal degenerative changes on structural tests. [footnotes omitted]
The authors do not define “soft tissue lesion”, and there is nothing that mentions a requirement that a radiculopathy
be present. A rating under this type of spinal disorder alone is 4% WPI for the cervical spine, 2% WPI for the
Page 3 of 3
§ 4.15 Spinal Injury Cases—DRE vs. ROM Methods
thoracic spine, and 5% WPI for the lumbar spine. You can see how use of the language in the AMA Guides can be
interpreted to fill in a DRE gap if the medical evidence in the case justifies the rating under the ROM method.
In fact, in some jurisdictions, either by statute or regulation, the DRE method is not even used and only the ROM
method is used in spinal injury workers’ compensation cases. We also know that the 6th edition of the AMA Guides,
which is scheduled to be published in December 2007, completely eliminates the use of the DRE and ROM
methods and instead uses a different approach that provides a matrix for evaluating spinal impairments that take
into account anatomic, diagnosis, and functional losses. The use of the 6th edition of the AMA Guides in California
workers’ compensation cases will not occur in the absence of legislation that amends Labor Code § 4660(b)(1).
In the example above, the physician believed and the WCJ found that the ROM method applied in the case, rather
than the DRE method, because the applicant had three bulging discs within the lumbar spinal sub-region along with
two adjacent annular tears. So she had five specific items of pathology within the lumbar spine sub-region, and the
physician opined that the ROM method applied under Table 15-7, Section II(B) and the WCJ agreed.
Remember that a radiculopathy is any kind of discomfort that is coming from the spinal nerve roots—pain,
numbness, shooting pain, burning, throbbing, stabbing pain, or paresthesias (pins and needles sensation). The
authors in the AMA Guides also warn us that EMG and nerve conduction studies do not detect all types of
radiculopathies. So a person can complain of radicular symptoms without any positive findings on an EMG/NCV
testing.
In using the DRE method, the physician must distinguish between the criteria for a DRE Category II and a Category
III based at times on the difference between whether a radiculopathy is “non-verifiable” (DRE Category II) or
“verifiable” (DRE Category III). The determination of whether a radiculopathy is verifiable or non-verifiable has
nothing to do with the credibility of the applicant. The determination is a medical judgment call by the physician
based upon the clinical findings.
A “non-verifiable” radiculopathy is one that is based upon a positive diagnostic imaging finding, e.g., herniated
lumbar or cervical disc, that produces radicular symptoms but not along a nerve distribution. For example, if a
person has a left-sided herniated lumbar disc at L-4 to L-5 and complains of radiating pain into the left buttock and
down the left leg with normal electrodiagnostic testing (negative EMG/NCV), this would be a non-verifiable
radiculopathy. However, if the person was having pain at the top of his or her left foot with paresthesias (sensation
of pins and needles) with a left-sided herniated lumbar disc at L-4 to L-5, and negative EMG/NCV, this would be a
verifiable radiculopathy because the parasthesia is occurring along the peroneal nerve distribution, which is a
branch of the tibial nerve coming from the sciatic nerve. See AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Figure 17-8, page 551.
The point of the example above involving the bartender is that counsel needs to develop the record to assist the
judge in determining permanent disability, including which method—DRE or ROM—applies in a given case, and
asking the judge to give the appropriate rating instructions to the Disability Evaluation Unit.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.16
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.16 Muscle Strength Deficits
Under the AMA Guides, can an impairment rating be based upon muscle strength loss? For example, an AME was
confronted with a case involving a patient who has carpal tunnel syndrome at the right wrist, right thumb de
Quervain’s tenosynovitis, and right elbow medical epicondylitis. The AME wanted to use grip strength as a ratable
impairment.
He opined in his report that the reason he wanted to use grip strength loss was because of the three diagnoses that
occurred in this case which involve three areas that immediately affect the patient’s midforearm, which is primarily
responsible for grip and pinch strength. The physician stated that he felt the loss of strength was permanent and the
best method of rating the overall impairment because there was no loss of motion nor ratable neurological deficits,
except, arguably, grade 4 motor deficits for the median and ulnar nerves.
In this case, the physician stated his rationale for his use of the muscle strength loss method of rating impairment,
he followed the instructions in the AMA Guides while using the muscle strength loss rating method, and his
conclusions may constitute substantial evidence. Bear in mind, however, in no less than four places, the authors of
the AMA Guides caution physicians not to use grip loss as a primary or even secondary method of evaluating
impairments, especially if there are other methods that more accurately reflect the person’s impairment.
In fact, there are tables throughout AMA Guides Chapters 16 and 17 along with specific instructions that allow the
use of muscle strength deficits to be rated in addition to other ratable factors. See AMA Guides, Tables 16-31
through 16-35, pages 507–510, for upper extremities, and Tables 17-7 and 17-8, pages 531–532, for lower
extremities.
If you have an upper or lower extremity case that involves muscle strength loss, make sure you read and
understand the instructions in the AMA Guides Chapter 16, page 508, which pertain to the use of the tables for
muscle strength deficits:
In a rare case, if the examiner believes the individual’s loss of strength represents an impairing factor that has
not been considered adequately by other methods in the Guides, the loss of strength may be rated
separately … . [T]he impairment due to loss of strength could be combined with the other impairments, only if
based on unrelated etiologic or pathomechanical causes. [Emphasis in original]
The authors of this quote do not define the terms, “unrelated etiologic or pathomechanical causes.” Perhaps an
example of this is if there was a loss of motion of the wrist, thumb or elbow joints because of an injury and there is
muscle strength deficits due to disuse or other etiologies that are not related to the loss of motion of the joint. The
instructions require the physician to state the reason why muscle strength loss is being used as a method of rating
impairment either alone or in combination with other methods.
One of the most misunderstood and misquoted instructions in the AMA Guides involving muscle strength deficits is
set forth in the AMA Guides, Chapter 16, Section 16.8a, page 508:
Decreased strength cannot be rated in the presence of decreased motion, painful conditions, deformities, or
absence of parts (eg, thumb amputation) that prevent effective application of maximal force in the region being
evaluated. [Emphasis in original]
Page 2 of 3
§ 4.16 Muscle Strength Deficits
There are many out of state physicians or reviewers who are misquoting the above instructions and making
representations to claims administrators and legal counsel that muscle strength loss cannot be used as a method of
determining impairment. Some medical reports written by California physicians are being second-guessed about
whether muscle strength loss can be rated in workers’ compensation cases.
If you have a case in which ratings based upon muscle strength loss are being described, you must develop the
record and have the physician justify his or her use of this method by making sure that all of the instructions in the
AMA Guides for the use of muscle strength loss are being properly followed.
For example, a case involves a machinist who is a long term employee of a metal shop and who has an admitted
injury resulting in surgery to his right shoulder that is described in the operative report as a “partial tear, rotator cuff,
debridement, decompression, and a distal clavicle resection arthoplasty.” In his MMI report, the MPN treating
physician indicated that the applicant’s permanent impairment can be rated based upon three factors: 6% upper
extremity impairment due to loss of range of motion of the shoulder; 12% upper extremity impairment due to muscle
strength loss; and 10% upper extremity impairment due to the distal clavicle resection arthroplasty.
There are several points about this case that are worthwhile discussing for the purpose of developing the record.
First of all, the physician ended up issuing three MMI reports: the original that stated the above information, and two
supplemental reports which were written in response to a claims adjuster’s letters requesting clarification. The first
supplemental report indicated the actual measurements the physician obtained and relied on during the permanent
and stationary examination and which described how the physician arrived at the total upper extremity impairment
rating of 18%. The second supplemental report indicated that the adjuster was correct in his conclusion that the
total upper extremity impairment rating should not be 18%, but rather 6%, based solely on the loss of range of
motion of the shoulder joint.
This prompted a deposition of the treating physician that resulted in the physician reaffirming his original
conclusions about the applicant having an 18% upper extremity rating. During the deposition, the physician
admitted that he was only familiar with Chapters 16 and 17 of the AMA Guides because he was a shoulder, elbow
and knee specialist. However, he admitted that he was not familiar with the instructions in Chapters 1 and 2 of the
AMA Guides. When asked to produce the letters from the adjuster who caused him to issue the two supplemental
reports, he could not find them in his chart. It was later discovered that the letters from the adjuster were prompted
by an out of state physician who, for a fee, had reviewed the original MMI report of this physician and who wrote the
adjuster what to ask the physician about his use of the AMA Guides.
The adjuster questioned the use of muscle strength loss and the distal clavicle resection arthroplasty ratings. The
adjuster stated in his letter to the treating physician that you cannot use muscle strength loss as a rating if the
muscle strength deficit is caused by pain, loss of motion, deformities or loss of a part. He then stated that you can
only rate distal clavicle resection arthroplasty if there is a total shoulder joint replacement. This led to the second
supplemental report from the physician that concluded only the loss of motion of the shoulder joint was ratable.
In his deposition, the above quoted instructions in the AMA Guides were read to the physician concerning muscle
strength loss, and the physician testified that he had not read the instructions, but now that they were pointed out to
him, it was his opinion that muscle strength loss is appropriate in this case because he followed the applicant from
his pre-operative status through surgery and his post-surgical rehabilitation that lasted for six months, and pain, loss
of motion, deformities and loss of parts did not prevent the applicant’s effective ability to use maximum effort in the
muscle strength testing. The quoted language in the instructions in the AMA Guides led the physician to affirm his
prior conclusions about the valid use of muscle strength loss in this case since loss of motion alone was not and did
not adequately reflect this applicant’s overall shoulder impairments.
As to the distal clavicle resection arthroplasty, the instructions in the AMA Guides were read to the physician from
Chapter 16, Section 16.7b, page 505, as follows:
Resection arthroplasty of a joint may be carried out with or without implant replacement …
Page 3 of 3
§ 4.16 Muscle Strength Deficits
In the presence of decreased motion, motion impairments are derived separately (Section 16.4) and combined
with the arthroplasty impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
After reading this quote to the physician during the deposition, the physician was asked where in the instructions of
the AMA Guides indicate that there has to be a total joint replacement in order for the 10% upper extremity rating to
apply in a distal clavicle resection arthroplasty that occurred in this case. The physician testified that he was “told by
other shoulder physicians” that Table 16-27 only applies in total shoulder joint replacement cases as a 10% add-on
because of the wording within Table 16-27, but now that he has read the instructions in the AMA Guides, the
patient’s resection arthroplasty rates the 10% upper extremity impairment. He agreed that the instructions in the
AMA Guides do not require a total joint replacement to be required in order to rate for distal clavicle resections such
as what occurred in this case.
To add insult to injury, this example in Table 6-27 points to one of the 300 medical errors in the Guides. Table 16-18
describes the maximum upper extremity and WPI values for each upper extremity joint. The maximum value of the
acromioclavicuylar (AC) joint is 15% WPI while a distal clavicle resection arthroplasty is 6% WPI in Table 16-27.
The problem is that a distal clavicle resection arthroplasty is a surgical removal of the entire AC joint! So is it a 15%
WPI or a 6% WPI? An applicant’s attorney would of course argue the higher WPI and defense counsel will argue
the lower. Physicians seem to be split on the issue.
Defense counsel would argue that the AMA Guides mandate that the physician use the best description of the
impairment applicable in a given case and this case mainly involves the loss of range of motion of the shoulder
joint, that the distal clavicle resection arthroplasty was due to a non-industrial osteophyte complex, and that the
muscle strength disorder is already included in the loss of motion rating. These arguments should be developed
during the deposition of the treating or evaluating physician.
This example illustrates how important it is for counsel to make sure that physicians utilize the instructions within
the AMA Guides as much as they rely on the actual tables and figures to determine an impairment rating. The
example also illustrates how important it is for attorneys to learn the medicine as well as the law in AMA Guides
cases.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.17
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.17 How to Rate Chronic Pain Syndromes
“Impairment due primarily to intractable pain may greatly influence an individual’s ability to function” [AMA Guides
5th Edition, Section 13.8, page 343]. To some medical practitioners, pain is the “fifth vital sign” and besides
checking blood pressure, heart rate, respiration, and temperature of a patient, it is becoming common practice for
physicians to also ask patients to rate themselves on a visual analog scale (VAS) for pain.
The International Association of the Study of Pain has defined pain as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional
experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage.” Pain is a
subjective symptom with both psychological and sensory components—there does not have to be tissue damage
for pain to occur [see IASP 2013, www.iasp-pain.org and go to the IASP Taxonomy section on the home page].
One of the most vexing issues that we see in our cases is whether or not chronic pain conditions can be rated
under the AMA Guides when an injured worker becomes MMI or permanent and stationary. The first issue is to
determine whether or not a person has a chronic pain condition and if so which kind. Then a determination has to
be made as to whether the injured worker has received all reasonable medical treatment to address the chronic
pain condition so that it reasonably can be considered to be stabilized and ready for WPI ratings. If the treating or
evaluating physician is convinced that the chronic pain condition is stabilized with treatment, then and only then can
the injured worker be declared MMI/permanent and stationary and WPI ratings can be assigned. But how are
physicians to utilize the AMA Guides to rate chronic pain syndromes?
An ancillary issue is, can a physician rate drug addiction or dependency that is caused by an industrial injury? We
see significant cases in which an injured worker is placed on opioids, benzodiazepines, and hypnotics (sleep
medications) and becomes dependent on them on a long term, if not permanent, basis. See the discussion of
medication side effects in § 4.14, above. Remember, drug addiction or dependency is a separate and distinct issue
from any impairment associated with the side effects of medication in general. In fact, case law has supported the
fact that an injured worker's drug dependency along with his or her physical limitations rendered the injured worker
presumptively permanently and totally disabled based on the fact pursuant to Labor Code § 4662. See the
discussion in § 4.28, below.
There are different types of chronic pain conditions that once diagnosed and stabilized can form the basis for WPI
ratings using the AMA Guides. There are basically two types of chronic pain cases—ones that have a physiologic
explanation and those that do not.
Physiologic chronic pain cases have two different types within that category—nociceptive and neuropathic pain.
Nociceptive pain involves actual tissue damage that causes pain receptors (nociceptor nerves) to fire along neural
pathways. The nociceptors cells do not stop firing, and the bio-chemical result is that the local region tells the dorsal
spine that the local area is in pain and the spine then tells the pain receptors in the brain and the injured worker
feels sharp, aching or throbbing pain in the local area of tissue damage. Nociceptive pain can be caused by an
otherwise benign pathology. Neuropathic pain on the other hand is caused by actual nerve damage, and injured
workers describe pain along a nerve distribution as burning, a “heavy sensation,” or numbness along the nerve
pathway. Many injured workers also complain of weakness of an involved extremity. Neuropathic pain can be
caused by direct trauma to a nerve (a “pinched” nerve), malnutrition, alcoholism, diabetic polyneuropathy,
inflammation, or an infection.
Page 2 of 4
§ 4.17 How to Rate Chronic Pain Syndromes
The physiologic chronic pain cases involve such conditions as failed lumbar syndrome that can be caused by many
factors, including scar tissue formation around nerve roots, multi-level spinal pathology, arachnoiditis, and spinal
instability. Other physiologically based chronic pain conditions include complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS)
either in the form of Type I RSD or Type II Causalgia. This condition can occur in an upper extremity, lower
extremity, or combination of them. See § 4.18, below, for a discussion of the diagnosis of CRPS.
On the other hand, there is non-physiologically based chronic pain, which is essentially referred to as “somatic
symptom disorders” that involve pain as the primary symptom but where there is no known bio-physiological
explanation of the source of the pain. Somatic pain related disorders can be as debilitating as physiologically based
pain, but the frustration of physicians, attorneys, claims examiners, and in most cases, the injured worker himself or
herself is that there is no medical explanation for the existence of the pain. There is no longer any tissue or nerve
damage, or there was not any to begin with at the time of injury, but there is a perception of severe debilitating pain
where the injured worker lives his or her life around the pain as the center of his or her universe. The important
reminder here is for these injured workers, any underlying physical injury has long ago healed by objective medical
standards and there is no longer a physical explanation for these injured workers’ complaints of intractable pain.
The American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, IV-Text Revised
(DSM-IV TR) included Pain Disorder as a diagnosis for these patients. The DSM-5, adopted by the APA in May
2013 eliminated Pain Disorder as a diagnosis and instead subsumed it into a new section called Somatic Symptom
and Related Disorders [see DSM-5 page 309]. The now obsolete DSM-IV TR Pain Disorder required as part of the
diagnostic criteria that there be no underlying medical explanation for the painful condition. Under the DSM-5, the
APA has eliminated that as a required part of the diagnostic criteria. The authors of the DSM-5 recognize that [see
DSM-5 pages 309–310]:
[S]omatic symptom disorders can also accompany diagnosed medical disorders. The reliability of determining
that a somatic symptom is medically unexplained is limited, and grounding a diagnosis on the absence of an
explanation is problematic and reinforces mind-body dualism. It is not appropriate to give an individual a mental
disorder diagnosis solely because a medical cause cannot be demonstrated. Furthermore, the presence of a
medical diagnosis does not exclude the possibility of a co-morbid medical disorder, including a somatic
symptom and related disorder. Perhaps because of the predominant focus on lack of medical explanation,
individuals regard these diagnoses as pejorative and demeaning, implying that their physical symptoms were
not “real.” The new classification defines the major diagnosis, somatic symptom disorder, on the basis of
positive symptoms (distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in response
to these symptoms).
In the DSM-5, diagnoses in the DSM-IV of somatization disorder, hypochondriasis, pain disorder, and
undifferentiated somatoform disorder (used by some physicians to rate fibromyalgia in the past) have been
removed and substituted with the new category of Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders [see DSM-5 pages
812–13].
RATING CHRONIC PAIN WHEN THERE IS OBJECTIVE MEDICAL EVIDENCE
• The first step to rate WPI for chronic pain syndromes is to identify any permanent objective medical findings.
The difficulty in all of these types of chronic pain cases is how to rate them accurately in accordance with current
case law. The first rule is to recognize the diagnosis and whether there are permanent objective medical findings.
• The second step is to identify the primary parts of body injured and to rate them in accordance with the strict
application of the AMA Guides.
The Court of Appeal in Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) “Guzman III”
[(2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837] mandates that in establishing the
most accurate rating is to utilize the applicable chapter, tables, and methods in the Guides and determine the strict
WPI ratings for each part of body injured. See Chapters 4 through 7 of this guidebook for a discussion of the
Guzman III case. So if you have a lumbar, cervical, or thoracic spine case, you utilize Chapter 15 of the AMA
Page 3 of 4
§ 4.17 How to Rate Chronic Pain Syndromes
Guides; if you have a shoulder, hand, elbow, or wrist case you utilize Chapter 16 of the AMA Guide; if you have a
knee, ankle, hip, or leg case, you utilize Chapter 17; if you have a heart or hypertension case, you utilize Chapters 3
and 4, and so on.
• The third step is to determine whether the strict WPI ratings are the most accurate ratings in a given case and,
if not, what alternative rating method produces the most accurate ratings.
If a case evolves into a chronic pain case, the treating and evaluating physician and common sense will indicate
that the injured worker has not recovered from an industrial injury. In so many of our cases, secondary gain is not a
primary motivating factor—most injured workers are motivated to get better and return to work. Regardless of how
cynical you may be, the epidemiology of work injuries indicates the vast majority of injured workers nationwide want
to get better and return to work and to productive lives, and most people do. It is easy for claims administrators,
employers, and defense counsel to become cynical when we see so many failures.
Attorneys who practice social security disability law see the same phenomenon in their clients, regardless of
whether or not an illness or injury is work related—most people who get sick or injured are motivated to get better
and return to productivity in their lives.
That being said, the AMA Guides provides a framework for evaluating WPI ratings in cases that evolve into chronic
pain syndromes. Much of the discussion of these conditions are scattered throughout the Guides, but there are
many different ways to rate chronic pain cases. As stated above, it starts with a diagnosis with permanent objective
medical findings.
• If there is a chronic pain syndrome, the fourth step is to identify how the strict or alternative WPI ratings can be
adjusted to account for the chronic pain syndrome as opposed to a 3% WPI add-on for pain related
impairment pursuant to Pages 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS.
The key to this is to differentiate between a 3% pain add-on to a strict WPI rating and evaluating a chronic pain
syndrome separately as its own ratable entity. The difference between the two is that a chronic pain syndrome
usually arises out of a separate diagnosis such as complex regional pain syndrome (RSD or causalgia), post-
traumatic neuralgia, thoracic outlet syndrome, fibromyalgia, or what used to be called a psychiatric “pain disorder”,
which is now more accurately called a somatic symptom disorder. For a detailed discussion about fibromyalgia and
how to rate it, see § 4.26, below, and for a discussion of the 3% WPI pain related add-on, see § 4.27, below.
In certain cases, we see applicants who have a fairly routine injury, such as the development of carpal tunnel
syndrome or a herniated lumbar disc, surgery is performed, and then all heck breaks loose and the applicant
becomes severely disabled. These cases, fortunately, are rare in clinical medical practices. The diagnosis and
treatment of chronic pain syndromes have developed into a medical specialty in its own right and some discussion
is in order here.
In clinical medical practice, it is not so much what the chronic pain syndrome is called; rather, it is more relevant as
to what the presenting symptoms are and what are the best ways to treat them. The AMA Guides refer only once to
independently ratable chronic pain syndromes in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, Section
13.8, page 343.
Do not confuse a diagnosis of a chronic pain syndrome that is discussed as a ratable permanent impairment in
Section 13.8 of the AMA Guides and the up to 3% WPI add-on for pain that has a greater than expected effect on a
person’s ADL functioning as indicated in AMA Guides, Chapter 18, and page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS. In order to
have a ratable permanent WPI impairment for a stand-alone diagnosis of a chronic pain syndrome, there must be
one of the three diagnosis mentioned in Section 13.8: CRPS-RSD; CRPS Causalgia; or “posttraumatic neuralgia.”
The instructions in AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Section 13.8, page 343, state:
To rate an impairment for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and RSD in an upper extremity, see Table 13-22.
If a lower extremity needs to be rated for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, or RSD, use the station and gait
impairment criteria in Table 13-15.
Page 4 of 4
§ 4.17 How to Rate Chronic Pain Syndromes
“Posttraumatic neuralgia” is not defined in the AMA Guides, so counsel needs to rely on the clinical expertise of the
diagnosing physician to determine if this criteria can be used to rate a condition as a “chronic pain syndrome.” Bear
in mind, “neuralgia” is defined as severe, stabbing, throbbing, or burning pain along a nerve distribution. So there
has to be neuropathic or nociceptor pain for a chronic pain syndrome to be ratable as a stand-alone impairment.
Counsel must develop the record to determine the nature of the chronic pain syndrome and its origin.
An interesting anomaly in the AMA Guides is that a neuropathic chronic pain syndrome affecting a lower extremity
can rate up to a 60% WPI under AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Table 13-15, at page 336, but an amputated leg rates a
40% WPI under AMA Guides, Chapter 17. The only explanation of this disparity is that a neuropathic chronic pain
syndrome affects more than just the injured lower extremity.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.18
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.18 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
[1] Overview
The medical diagnosis of Complex Regional Pain Syndrome was originally called “reflex sympathetic
dysthrophy” or “causalgia.” CRPS is controversial within the medical community with disagreements among
orthopedic surgeons, anesthesiologists, neurologists, physiatrists, and pain management specialists as to the
diagnostic criteria, who is most qualified to provide treatment, and what modalities are effective for treatment of
the condition.
The condition was discovered during the civil war when about 3% of soldiers wounded in an upper or lower
extremity with no bone involvement from the bullet wound (a “through and through wound”) would develop
hypersensitivity and disuse of the affected limp with changes in the nails, sweating, discoloration of the limb,
severe burning pain and sometimes trophic changes in the skin or bone. We have seen this condition arise in
some of our cases, usually the result of a fairly innocuous injury or routine surgery and sometimes the applicant
completely loses the use of the limb.
The current accepted nomenclature that medical physicians at least have agreed to is calling the disorder
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome, Type I RSD and Type II Causalgia. Type II Causalgia involves damage to a
nerve and the symptoms follow a predicted and obvious nerve distribution. CRPS Type I RSD does not involve
a nerve distribution but involves the entire limb or a major part of one. The symptoms are exactly the same and
the consequences of CRPS can be devastating on a person’s personal, social and occupational functioning,
sometimes resulting in total incapacitation.
That being said, the AMA Guides refer to CRPS all over the place:
• CHAPTER 13, TABLE 13-22, PAGE 343
• CHAPTER 16, SECTION 16.5e, PAGES 495–496 AND TABLE 16-16, PAGE 496
• CHAPTER 17, SECTION 17.2m, PAGE 553
• CHAPTER 18, TABLE 18-2, PAGE 571
• CHAPTER 18, TABLE 18-3, PAGE 575
Remember, there are different authors for each of the chapters in the AMA Guides with some inconsistencies
between chapters on the same subjects. In addition, the diagnostic criteria for CRPS have changed since the
AMA Guides 5th Edition was published in November 2000. For more information, see the IASP website at
www.iasp-pain.org.
So what if measurements and descriptions of AMA Guides 5th Edition are no longer valid based upon current
scientific consensus? What if an underlying medical condition has new diagnostic criteria that were not
anticipated or accepted when the 5th Edition was published? What if a medical condition that did not result in a
ratable impairment is now considered ratable?
Since the AMA Guides 5th Edition allows ratings by analogy using clinical judgment, a physician can rate
impairments in cases in which the diagnostic criteria for a medical condition has changed from that listed in the
5th Edition. Because the diagnostic criteria for CRPS has changed since November 2000, new medical criteria
for the diagnosis is admissible, but the record must be developed in order to show that the diagnostic criteria
has changed by consensus and an applicant has the new criteria that results in an impairment based upon the
November 2000 version listed in the AMA Guides 5th Edition. The Court of Appeal in Guzman III accounts for
Page 2 of 6
§ 4.18 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
this by allowing physicians to go outside the AMA Guides 5th Edition for a diagnosis using current nationally
accepted diagnostic criteria and then returning to the 5th Edition of the Guides for the impairment ratings.
In CRPS cases, some points need to be made. First of all, the actual diagnosis is rare. Secondly, there are now
diagnostic criteria for a clinical medical practice and stricter diagnostic criteria for research purposes. In a
research setting, the diagnostic criteria for CRPS must involve 8 out of 12 symptoms listed in AMA Guides
Chapter 16, Table 16-16, Page 496. Curiously, there is no equivalent Table for CRPS in lower extremity cases
in Chapter 17.
In contrast, in a clinical medical setting, the diagnosis is reached by the physician using clinical judgment and
usually involves finding at least 6 out of 12 symptoms, sometimes even less than 6, depending upon the
severity and location of the presenting symptoms.
[2] The Politics of Medicine
The four different “types” of medicine are noteworthy. “Clinical medicine” involves a medical practice with
physicians utilizing clinical judgment, experience, skill, education and a community standard of care in the
diagnosis and treatment of patients.
“Research medicine” requires the highest standard of care, greater than in a clinical medical practice because
of the risks of new drugs, biologics or medical devices that go from animal studies to human studies. Research
medicine requires strict regulatory oversight of the research protocol including compliance with federal and
state regulations.
The AMA Guides is an example of “academic medicine”, which is a select group of physicians invited by a
medical society to develop “standards or guidelines” for clinical or research use. Academic medicine can be
part science, part art and part politics as is evident in the differences between the 4th, 5th and 6th editions of
the AMA Guides.
Finally, we have what has been called “litigation medicine”, which precisely incorporates what is being
discussed in this guidebook—where law and medicine merge or collide depending upon whose point of view
one is looking at. Examples of litigation medicine are the interpretation, meaning and application of the
instructions in the AMA Guides or the question of whether a medical treatment protocol is “consistent” with the
ACOEM guidelines.
The four types of medicine emerge in the adoption of the ACOEM medical treatment utilization guidelines, for
example. Remember the grading system for different treatment modalities? Some receive an “A” grade
because the treatment protocol is a result of clinical research with double blind, placebo controlled studies.
Most of the treatment protocols mentioned in ACOEM receive a “C” or “D” grade due to the lack of clinical
research because it would be unethical to conduct such clinical research. For example, it would be unethical to
conduct a study in which a surgeon operates randomly on some patients who have a herniated lumbar disc and
not operate on others and compare the residual functional capacities. That is why you cannot “grade” back
surgery as a treatment protocol because community standards of care require the individualization of treatment.
The discussion of CRPS in [1], above, is a good example of the collision of all four types of medicine.
Orthopedic surgeons take the position that they are the most qualified to diagnose and treat CRPS because
their clinical practices identify CRPS patients since CRPS emerges in orthopedic patients more often than in
other medical specialties. The clinical definitions of CRPS Type I RSD and Type II Causalgia are a result of
clinical practitioners who see these patients during their clinical practices. Research medicine is involved to try
to find effective and safe treatments for these difficult to treat patients. Academic medicine is trying to develop
national standards for diagnosis of CRPS and litigation medicine is trying to determine whether a person
actually has a CRPS disorder and what is causing it if the disorder even exists. You have art, science,
practicality and politics involved all at once.
[3] Strict Ratings of CRPS
The best advice to counsel in these CRPS cases is to utilize AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Section 13.8, pages 343
and Tables 13-15 for CRPS of the lower extremity and Table 13-22 for CRPS of the upper extremity. These two
Tables and the instructions on page 343 all utilize a clinical medicine criteria for diagnosis of CRPS. What is
Page 3 of 6
§ 4.18 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
interesting about Table 13-22 (and Table 13-16 for central nervous system disorders that affect the upper
extremity such as from a stroke) is that it includes consideration for loss of dexterity, which is a common
complaint for injured workers who have CRPS or a poor result from carpal tunnel surgery. Loss of dexterity is
only considered in Table 13-22 for an upper extremity, while loss of dexterity is nowhere in Chapter 16, the
Upper Extremities.
Many physicians will turn to Table 13-22 to rate a poor result from carpal tunnel surgery and in CRPS cases
because physicians like using tables and methods that refer to loss of function rather than rely on strict sensory
or pain and motor function loss of specific nerves.
In contrast, Table 16-16, which is within the CRPS section in AMA Guides Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities,
Page 496, utilizes the obsolete research medicine diagnostic criteria for CRPS. Which one do you use in an
upper extremity CRPS case? Use Section 13.8 of the AMA Guides in these rare cases since the criteria for
diagnosis for CRPS has been updated since the 5th Edition of the Guides was published in 2000 and Table 13-
22 hits the impairment on the head where most injured workers who legitimately have CRPS of the upper
extremity have no dexterity of that upper extremity, while others have no use of the upper extremity at all.
[4] CRPS as a Central Nervous System Disorder: A Case Study
A case handled by this author involved the diagnosis of Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) from a
lower extremity industrial injury. The WCAB upheld a trial judge’s decision that a WPI rating can exceed the
maximum value of an amputation and the medical reporting that formed the basis of the WCJ’s decision is a
model of a medical doctor writing a report that constitutes substantial medical evidence. The facts of the case
are as follows:
A 49-year-old retail clothing store manager sustained admitted injuries to her right foot, right toes, right hip
(trochanteric bursitis), right lower extremity (iliotibial band tendonitis), hypertension and CRPS when a display
case fell on her foot and she had unsuccessful foot surgeries. The parties agreed to two AME physicians,
internal medicine and orthopedic surgery. Defendant did not dispute the AME in internal medicine diagnosis or
WPI for hypertension:
• No prior history of HTN
• No family history of HTN
• No known risk factors that became causative during the period of onset, e.g., no smoking history, no
obesity (her BMI was 25)
• Onset of HTN was well documented by PTP pain medicine physician and correlated with her post injury
orthopedic conditions
• AME concluded Class 1 Table 4-2, 9% WPI with no apportionment
Combining the hypertension and the orthopedic ratings, defendant claimed the case rated 66% PD while
applicant claimed the case rated 72% PD. The WCJ adopted the orthopedic and internal medicine AME
conclusions and found that the applicant had a 72% PD.
Defendant appealed and contended that all of the applicant’s right lower extremity conditions when combined
using the Combined Values Chart exceeded the WPI value of an amputated leg (40% WPI) in violation of the
instructions in the AMA Guides and on page 1-11 of the 2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule.
Page 1-11 of the 2005 PDRS limits the permanent disability rating (after adjustment of the WPI ratings for
DFEC, age, occupation) to the value of an amputated limb:
The composite rating for an extremity (after adjustment) may not exceed the amputation value of the
extremity adjusted for earning capacity, occupation and age …
In his response to the appeal, the WCJ relied entirely on the orthopedic AME’s discussion of how he arrived at
the ratings for each lower extremity rating and the CRPS. The orthopedic AME assigned a 39% WPI for the
CRPS (right leg), 7% for the iliotibial band tendonitis (right lower extremity), 3% WPI for the trochanteric bursitis
(right hip), which after adjustment is 45% WPI (40% for a leg amputation).
After assessing all objective findings on exam, the AME stated:
Page 4 of 6
§ 4.18 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
The patient’s right foot remained with a constant deformity of inversion. Upon standing, she continued to
remain in an external rotation deformity of the right leg and knee. Her gait was affected. She was unable to
perform full weight bearing and continued to ambulate with antalgia. She has lost the normal rhythm and
cadence of her gait as previously documented and again has progressed. The exam was characterized by
findings consistent with CRPS including allodynia and hyperpathia as well as loss of active motion in the
toes on manual muscle and ROM testing. Diagnosis: S/P crush injury right foot, varus deformity, secondary
right hemipelvis, thigh and leg pain consistent with RSD; S/P (status post) right forefoot reconstructive
surgery with post-operative complications including infection requiring multiple I&D; history of postoperative
forefoot infection and cellulitis.
The abnormal positioning of the leg secondary to her right foot deformity was as a result of fatigue and
overuse of the right lower extremity from the pelvis to the foot culminating in the disorder characterized by
pain involving the entire foot, hindfoot, right leg, knee and thigh, trochanteric region consistent with
trochanteric bursitis and iliotibial band tendonitis. There was evidence of peroneal nerve injury as well as
diffuse tenderness of the ankle joint in the dorsum of the mid foot and plantar aspect of the right foot.
Counsel should note the detailed description of the applicant’s anatomic loss and objective medical findings.
You should always start with the operative medical reports to determine whether a physician has properly and
completely assessed all objective findings in a given case since those objective findings form the basis of many
WPI ratings directly or indirectly. In addition to reviewing all operative reports, counsel should also focus on all
physical examination sections in evaluating and treating physician reports because, again, those findings often
form the basis of an impairment rating and are sometimes overlooked by the physician who writes an MMI
report.
In this case, the AME thoroughly listed all objective medical findings based on the history of multiple surgeries
and based on his own physical findings on examination of the applicant.
The AME assigned a 45% WPI impairment after using the CVC:
• 3% WPI Table 17-33 for trochanteric bursitis (a strict rating)
• 7% WPI Table 17-33 for iliotibial band tendonitis (The AME cited Guzman III: “There is no actual
classification system for iliotibial band tendonitis included in the AMA Guides. Considering that the
injury is similar to a cruciate or collateral ligament laxity, given that the iliotibial band is ligamentous in
nature as are cruciate and collateral ligaments.”)
• The AME assigned a 45% WPI impairment after using the Combined Values Chart
• 39% WPI for the CRPS using Table 13-15. (The AME stated: “The pathology of CRPS occurs in the
central nervous system. Therefore, as recommended by the Guides, the evaluation should utilize the
station and gait impairment criteria from Table 13-15 in order to rate lower extremity impairments due
to lesions in the central nervous system ‘such as brain and/or spinal cord.’ ”)
• No apportionment to non-industrial factors.
In this case, the AME properly and completely applied the AMA Guides 5th Edition to the objective medical
findings and based on his own physical examination of the patient. Notice how he took two unlisted medical
conditions (iliotibial band tendonitis and trochanteric bursitis) and found analogous WPI ratings for each within
the four corners of the AMA Guides. This case demonstrates the depth of knowledge the AME has of both the
AMA Guides and the requirements for a thorough compliant medical report as set forth in Section 2.6 of the
Guides and 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10606.
The WCAB upheld the WCJ’s decision based on the substantial evidence consisting of the AME reports [see
Porter v. Coldwater Creek, 2014 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 178 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)].
The AME referred to and quoted AMA Guides Sec. 17.2m, page 553:
[CRPS] makes an impairment evaluation based on the traditional physical examination impossible … no
single peripheral nerve has been injured, and the pain involves the entire limb. Thus, trying to rate this as a
peripheral nerve injury is inappropriate. No specific method described in the lower extremity or upper
extremity chapters adequately covers this unique circumstance.
The AME also referred to and quoted another section of the AMA Guides Sec. 17.2m, page 553:
Page 5 of 6
§ 4.18 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
The pathology in CRPS is currently believed to occur in the central nervous system so the evaluator should
use the station and gait impairment criteria in Table 13-15 to rate lower extremity impairments due to
lesions in the central nervous system.
Notice here how the AME quoted actual sections of the text in the AMA Guides supporting his position that
CRPS is primarily a central nervous system disorder and is not simply a lower or upper extremity condition
even though the triggering event that led to the diagnosis of CRPS was, in this case, a lower extremity injury.
Again, we encounter the issue of the difference between causation of the injury and causation of impairment.
Here, causation of the injury was a heavy display case falling on the applicant’s foot, and causation of the
impairment is the CRPS and associated lower extremity impairments that relate back to the original injury and
unsuccessful treatment.
In the AMA Guides, Table 13-15 Station and Gait, provides for WPI ratings up to 60%, which is greater than the
value of an amputated leg (which is 40% WPI). Since the WPI value of an amputated leg is 40% WPI, it is clear
that the AMA Guides recognizes CRPS as a central nervous system disorder that can result in an impairment
greater than the loss of a lower extremity. Do not be confused by the different nomenclature in the AMA Guides
for causalgia, RSD, CRPS. The AMA Guides 5th Edition was published in 2000 and some of the terminology is
obsolete.
The International Association of the Study of Pain changed the names and diagnostic criteria for CRPS in 2006.
The DCA in Almaraz-Guzman III allows you to use current diagnostic criteria and then apply the AMA Guides
5th Ed. for WPI ratings [see Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) (2010) 187
Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837].
As explained in the WCJ’s Report and Recommendation on Reconsideration [see Porter v. Coldwater Creek,
2014 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 178 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)]:
… It is the court’s opinion that the instructions on page 1-11 [of the 2005 PDRS] regarding the composite
rating for an extremity not exceeding the amputation value of that extremity are meant to apply to
impairments within the extremity category; that is, several combined impairments within the [lower
extremity] category should not exceed the amputation value of the lower extremity. As a central nervous
system disorder which is recognized as a different body system by the AMA Guides that could also result
in greater impairment than the loss of an extremity, a rating for CRPS should not be included in the
composite rating for an extremity … .
The WCJ, in footnote 3 of his Report, stated [see Porter v. Coldwater Creek, 2014 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS
178 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)]:
An impairment in a peripheral nerve of the lower extremity would be a lower extremity impairment and
could be rated using the appropriate sections of Chapter 17 (lower extremities). However, as a central
nervous system impairment, CRPS is rated using a completely different chapter and methodology.
The WCJ continued:
Therefore, the court believes it was correct to first combine the lower extremity ratings for the iliotibial band
tendinitis and trochanteric bursitis pursuant to the instructions on page 1-11 of the Schedule, and then
combine the ratings for the CRPS, hypertension and lower extremity per the CVC to arrive at the final
rating of 72% permanent disability.
Regardless of the technical requirements of the 2005 PDRS, the AME in orthopedic surgery rebutted the PDRS
by explaining how and why page 1-11 does not apply in this case.
COMMENTARY:
The case illustrates the thorough analysis conducted by the AME of the medical and medical-legal
issues in this case. In addition, an outside disability evaluator had been hired by the defendant to rate
the AME reports and in doing so, erroneously reported that the AME rating of the injury exceeded the
amputation value of the lower extremity in violation of the 2005 PDRS. This misinformation given to the
defendants by an outside disability rater turned out to force this case to trial and reconsideration. A
word of caution to the defense community—check your outside rating specialist’s work or don’t use
Page 6 of 6
§ 4.18 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
them at all and obtain a consultative rating from the DEU instead.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.19
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.19 Thoracic Outlet Syndrome
We have seen a number of thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) cases in which a diagnosis is made by a physician, a rib
resection surgery is performed, and the injured worker does not get better. These cases involve sophisticated
members of our work force, including, within just the last year, a pharmacist at a major teaching university, a
financial planner at a major aerospace company, and an admitting technician at a hospital. Depositions of
orthopedic surgeons have uniformly indicated that the only legitimate thoracic syndrome case is one in which the
patient has an extra cervical rib and there is compression from that rib on either the subclavian artery or on the
brachial plexus.
Thoracic outlet syndrome symptoms can be identical to those from a cervical spinal nerve compression injury,
internal derangement of the shoulder, or in many cases, a combination of the two. Physicians must perform
differential diagnosis to rule out cervical spine pathology and shoulder pathology before any thoracic outlet
syndrome is diagnosed. In addition, a full work up must rule out compression of the subclavian artery (first seen
with a positive test where the artery’s pulse stops when the patient raises his or her arm and hand as if he or she is
being sworn in to testify as a witness). Then if that test is negative, the physician may want to order a brachial
plexus MRI to confirm the presence of nerve compression at that location. If the patient does not have an extra
cervical rib, then red flags should appear on the diagnosis of TOS and claims administrators must be diligent in
sending requests for authorization for rib resection surgery to utilization review. It is doubtful that Independent
Medical Review will reverse a UR denial of rib resection surgery in the absence of evidence of extra rib brachial
plexus or arterial/venous compression.
The following discussion about thoracic syndrome was derived from the deposition testimony of a well-known
expert on the subject who is Board Certified and a professor of vascular surgery at a major medical school and
clinical training hospital: Thoracic outlet syndrome is a situation where you may have symptoms of pain, numbness,
tingling, weakness in an arm related to pinching of the arm, the nerves, the arteries, or veins, as they cross out of
the chest and go into the arm. The area where they cross out of the chest is called the thoracic outlet. And
anatomically, that is defined by the first rib, so where these structures, the arteries, the nerves, the veins, come out
of the chest, cross over the first rib and go out to the arm, if they get pinched at that location and then cause a
patient to have pain, tingling, numbers, or weakness, then that is a situation that shows consistent with thoracic
outlet syndrome.
The physical examination to diagnose thoracic outlet syndrome involves determining if the patient has sensitivity on
palpation to the brachial plexus called “Erb’s Point.” The physician also taps over the nerves in that location and
checks for sensitivity over the pectoralis muscles. Some thoracic outlet patients have difficulty raising their arms
due to restricted range of motion of the shoulder girdle.
Originally, in the 1860s, when thoracic outlet syndrome was first identified as a disorder, the presence of a cervical
rib, or an “extra rib” is the oldest marker for thoracic outlet syndrome. The extra cervical rib may displace a
subclavian artery, resulting in a hand that is pale and lacking circulation. More recent research has indicated that a
person does not need an extra rib to develop thoracic outlet syndrome.
Manual testing by the evaluating or treating physician includes an “adduction external rotation” test where the
patient raises a hand as if you are about to be sworn in as a witness, and the pulse disappears for that wrist while
the hand is raised. That is a sign of vascular compression of the subclavian artery. An Adson maneuver is
Page 2 of 2
§ 4.19 Thoracic Outlet Syndrome
performed with the arm abducted down to the patient’s side and head turned and finally a deep breath is taken.
Again, pulse is taken to see if it disappears due to vascular compression. The Adson maneuver has been
discredited as not very sensitive compared to other testing to determine if there is nerve or vascular compression
pointing towards a diagnosis of thoracic outlet syndrome.
Most of the symptoms from thoracic outlet syndrome is in the shoulder. When surgery for thoracic outlet syndrome
is necessary, the physician performs a trans-axillary first rib resection. This involves partial removal of a rib and
partial removal of the scalene muscles.
Notwithstanding the caution about rib resection surgery due to TOS, how is it rated in the AMA Guides? What is
usually left after surgery for TOS is pain in the shoulder and arm along with significant loss of strength.
Most physicians do not realize that the AMA Guides include a whole section on the brachial plexus and how to rate
impairment related to it. Tables 16-12a and 16-12b on pages 485 and 485 provide the sensory and motor
distribution from the cervical spine to the brachial plexus. Table 16-13 on page 489 provides the maximum upper
extremity sensory (or pain) and motor impairment ratings for each cervical nerve root from C5 through T1.
Remember, brachial plexus injuries affect the shoulder girdle (deltoid, triceps), rotator cuff muscles, and the hand
sensory and motor functions.
If there is a lesion at a specific level in the cervical spine that causes both shoulder and hand pathology, you rate
the impairment along sensory or pain, and motor function loss. So you use the same approach in grading from 0 to
5 the sensory or pain and the motor function loss as you do in evaluating carpal tunnel syndrome by multiplying the
percentage loss times the maximum value of each affected nerve. So a Grade 3/5 60% C6 loss of sensory/pain
combined with motor loss would be a 30% upper extremity rating. Most physicians do not use this method despite
the fact that the AMA Guides are quite clear about how to rate neck pathology that affects the shoulder and hand
nerve distribution.
However, if the entire brachial plexus is involved, then you use Table 16-14 on page 490 where the maximum
sensory or motor or both combined impairment is 100% upper extremity impairment. This is probably the most
ignored Table in the AMA Guides! Physicians could use Table 16-14 in any chronic pain case where the injured
worker complains of pain, weakness, and loss of function in the shoulder and hand due to double crush-type
injuries (separate neck and shoulder injuries) or as a result of thoracic outlet syndrome that is not cured by rib
resection surgery. In any of these cases, there has to be documented objective medical evidence of nerve damage,
such as multi-level cervical spine pathology coupled with shoulder and hand muscle weakness and pain and/or
reduced sensation.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.20
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.20 Failed Lumbar Syndrome
A separate discussion of failed lumbar syndrome is in order for counsel to understand the medical-legal issues that
occur in these cases. One question arose in which an AME orthopedic surgeon asked how can a case be rated
when the physician believed that AMA Guides Chapter 15, The Spine, did not accurately reflect what the physician
thought should apply when the patient had a failed lumbar syndrome with the use of a cane.
First, you need to understand of what a “failed lumbar syndrome” consists. The purpose of any spinal surgery is to
reduce pain, eliminate radiculopathy and to improve personal, social and occupational functioning. In many cases,
there are multiple pathologies that occur within the lumbar spine at the same time. For example, a patient could
have any combination of a herniated intervertebral disc with nerve root impingement, spondylosis, spondylolysis,
spinal canal stenosis, neural foramina stenosis or spondylolithesis. In fact, any kind of intervertebral movement
(antero or retrolisthesis) is a sign of what is referred to as “mechanical back pain.” Patients with mechanical back
pain suffer severe pain with movement, such as extension, flexion or lateral flexion of the lumbar spine.
In certain cases, major spinal surgery is undertaken in which the patient’s outcome would have been better had
there been no surgery in the first place. The problem is that no one can predict with reasonable medical probability
who will benefit from spinal surgery and who will not. Some spinal surgeons require medical clearance from a
psychiatrist or psychologist prior to recommending elective spinal surgery. In fact, the protocol in the Medical
Treatment Utilization Schedule (MTUS) for chronic pain requires psychological or psychiatric medical clearance for
permanent implantation of a spinal stimulator. See the DWC website at www.dir.ca.gov and go to the “Medical
Providers” section and then go to MTUS for chronic pain.
If a patient has spinal surgery and after recovering from the initial effects of surgery does not improve with pain
reduction and increased functioning, then the patient is considered to have failed lumbar syndrome. So if no other
new pathology is discovered post surgically, such as a disc fragment or recurrent disc herniation, then the diagnosis
of failed lumbar syndrome may be appropriate. Note that the patient does not need to have multiple pathologies for
this to occur—we have seen failed lumbar syndrome occur in cases with only a one level herniated lumbar disc
after surgical correction. Some failed lumbar syndrome patients do not get relief from their pain except until after
either an implanted spinal stimulator or morphine pump is installed. There are as many cases of failed lumbar
syndrome cases outside the workers’ compensation system as there are within the system.
This being said, failed lumbar syndrome is very rare and the vast majority of patients nationally who have back
surgery recover with very little residual personal, social or occupational functioning deficits. But we have seen
enough bad cases to question how can these cases be rated under the AMA Guides?
For the example above in which the patient has failed lumbar syndrome with use of a cane, there are several
potential ways to rate a case like this. If the reason for the use of the cane is because of neuropathic pain, then the
following methods can be used:
1. DRE or ROM rating as appropriate; or
2. DRE or ROM rating combined with:
• Chapter 17, Section 17.21, rate sensory and motor = Grade 0-5 × maximum sensory or motor value of
effected nerve distribution (combine sensory and motor impairments); or
Page 2 of 3
§ 4.20 Failed Lumbar Syndrome
• Chapter 13, Section 13.5, Table 13-15, page 336, station and gait impairment due to peripheral nerve
impairment; or
• Chapter 17, Table 17-5, page 529, lower limb impairment due to gait derangement; or
• Chapter 13, Section 13.9 criteria, Tables 13-23 and 13-24, pages 344–351 and the “method” Section 1 on
page 350. This is used for neuropathic pain/sensory deficit and motor function impairments such as
that caused by “drop foot.”
When the use of a cane is included, then you use the highest rating for the lower extremity impairment and combine
it with the spinal impairment rating.
The problem is that the AMA Guides is being strictly construed by the raters from the Disability Evaluation Unit who
are taking the position that the AMA Guides requires that the physician use the one method of evaluating
impairment that most accurately reflects the underlying body system, organ or part that is causing impairments. In
failed lumbar syndrome cases, the problem comes from the spine and only Chapter 15 should be used because it is
intended to include all factors, including nerve damage from the nerve roots originating in the spinal structure.
In some failed lumbar spine cases the physician may try to justify the use of other chapters in the AMA Guides,
such as the sections in Chapters 13 and 17 listed above, and then combine them with the spinal impairment rating
from Chapter 15. In fact, Table 13-15 mentioned under the discussion above can be used in cases of neuropathic
pain in combination with a failed lumbar syndrome. Case law may have to be developed on the question of whether
in failed lumbar syndrome cases a physician can utilize the DRE or ROM method of rating within Chapter 15 and
then combine that rating with one from either Chapter 13 or 17.
In the above example, the physician rated the failed lumbar spine impairment using the DRE method and came up
with a 28% WPI rating and then combined it with a 15% WPI for the use of assistive devices under Table 17-5. The
physician stated in his AME report how and why he came to the conclusion that the DRE or ROM methods in
Chapter 15 were not accurate in his opinion to describe this patient’s impairment due to the severe failed lumbar
syndrome—the patient had to absolutely depend upon the use of a cane in order to ambulate safely because of
muscle spasms from his back along with continuing radiculopathy and weakness in his leg.
In a rare case, a patient with failed lumbar syndrome also has bladder control problems, especially in a cauda
equina syndrome case [see AMA Guides, page 383 and Example 15-18, page 398 for a description of cauda
equina syndrome]. In such a case, a rating under Chapter 15 DRE or ROM may be combined with the DRE rating
under the Corticospinal Tract section [see AMA Guides, Chapter 15, pages 395–398]. Table 15-6, pages 396–397,
is the same table as AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Table 13-19, page 341, for bladder control due to a “neurogenic”
lumbar spinal impairment.
Can an orthopedic surgeon rate a bladder control problem along with the actual spinal impairment rating? The AMA
Guides allow for any duly licensed medical doctor to rate any impairment as long as the instructions, descriptions
and measurements of the AMA Guides are followed and the underlying diagnosis is valid and reproducible [see
AMA Guides, Chapter 1]. The orthopedic surgeon should send the applicant to a urologist to perform urodynamic
testing to confirm a neurogenic problem as opposed to a localized problem with the bladder, ureter or kidneys. So
the failed lumbar syndrome with use of a cane and bladder control problems can have three separate ratings
combined.
If the applicant does not have neuropathic pain causing the use of a cane and the patient uses one because of
“instability” due to pain, then the AMA Guides state on page 529, with Table 17-5, that you cannot use lower limb
impairment due to gait derangement if the impairment is based only on subjective complaints of low back
discomfort. There has to be a neuropathic cause to justify the use of a cane.
In many of our cases, we see injured workers with failed lumbar surgery have implanted electronic spinal
stimulators or “morphine pumps.” The AMA Guides do not provide WPI ratings for these patients who have
implanted pain control devices. Experience has shown that implanted spinal stimulators only provide temporary
relief in serious cases and are surgically removed in most cases within five years from implantation because they
Page 3 of 3
§ 4.20 Failed Lumbar Syndrome
stop working because the electrodes move, or the injured worker becomes acclimated to the device. In implanted
infusion pump pain medication cases, patients become hypersensitive to any minute change in dosage or type of
medication that is placed into the infusion pump, and due to the side effects of the medication, very few if any of
these patients are able to return to the work force.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.21
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.21 Rating Chronic Pain in the Absence of Objective Medical Evidence
Can a chronic pain syndrome case be rated under the AMA Guides despite the absence of permanent objective
medical evidence for the pain? The answer depends upon the physician's diagnosis and the legal restrictions under
Labor Code § 4660.1 that prohibits a psychiatric impairment rating for a psychiatric diagnosis that is caused by a
physical injury in the absence of a violent act or catastrophic injury. See Chapter 5 of this guidebook for a
discussion of SB 863 and how permanent disability is now established for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/13.
In some cases, the only explanation for an injured worker's chronic pain syndrome is that of a psychiatric origin. If
that is the case, then the restrictions of Labor Code § 3208.3 apply and the analysis of WPI shifts to the GAF score
and associated WPI rating that is mandated by the 2005 PDRS. The fact that the DSM-5 published in May 2013
eliminates the GAF score along with Axis I through Axis V (the GAF score was Axis V), may not affect our rating
these cases. This is because the use of the GAF score is mandated by regulation. Remember, the 2005 PDRS
itself is a regulation adopted by the DWC Administrative Director and no changes to the 2005 PDRS on rating
psychiatric impairment are on the horizon.
This raises an interesting question. Since the GAF score has been eliminated from the DSM-5, can counsel make
the case that alternative and more accurate ratings for psychiatric injuries, including chronic pain, in the absence of
any remaining physical objective medical findings can be accomplished within the AMA Guides to rebut a WPI
rating based on a GAF score? So far, there is no published DCA case that supports using the AMA Guides to rebut
a GAF based WPI rating. However, there are WCAB panel decisions that do. The purpose of this discussion is to
raise the issue here since the DSM-5 has been adopted by the American Psychiatric Association and no one
currently knows what psychiatrists and psychologists will do with the application of prior editions of the DSM to
determine WPI ratings. Labor Code § 3208.3 is vaguely written, and an argument can be made that prior editions of
the DSM no longer apply and since there is no longer a GAF score, the 2005 PDRS ratings for psychiatric
impairment are obsolete. We will see how psychiatrists, psychologists, and the WCAB react to this.
However, in the context of chronic pain in the absence of a physical diagnosis, the AMA Guides may provide an
alternative framework for physicians to evaluate these cases and apply WPI ratings within the four corners of the
Guides. This rubric might apply in any psychiatric claim and not just chronic pain cases.
An alternative rating method for chronic pain cases that do not have an underlying physical explanation may be
analyzed as follows:
• What is the cause of the chronic pain syndrome?
• Rate ADL functioning using Table 1-2 on page 4 utilizing the severity classes set forth in Table 14-1 on page
366(?)
• Rate workplace function using the four categories listed on page 365 of the AMA Guides and also evaluate
them in the context of severity classes set forth in Table 14-1 on page 366
○ Understanding and memory, such as following instructions and carrying out procedures
○ Sustained concentration, productivity, and persistence to task completion
○ Social interaction with the public, co-workers, and management
○ Adaptation to changes in work place duties and responsibilities
Page 2 of 2
§ 4.21 Rating Chronic Pain in the Absence of Objective Medical Evidence
• Utilize Table 13-8 on page 325 for Class 1 through Class 4 for Rating Impairment Due To Emotional or
Behavioral Disorders
• Explain how and why an injured worker falls within a class and how a specific WPI rating is established within
a class
• Establish how and why the overall impairment is permanent
What is elegant about this method is that all of the criteria are within the four corners of the Guides. There seems to
be a much more logical correlation between using ADL and work function impairment assessments that are clearly
delineated in the Guides with an impairment rating schedule that is also within the Guides. The GAF scores
associated with WPI ratings in the 2005 PDRS are not based on any kind of scientific research or consensus of
psychiatrists or psychologists. It is based on a consensus of DEU raters and the former manager of the DEU who in
2005 developed this rubric.
The severity index in Table 14-1 while not providing any direct WPI ratings, does provide a psychiatrist or
psychologist with a way of assessing severity of impairment with a list of functions, both ADL and work, that he or
she can assess and then apply logically to the classes of emotional and behavioral WPI ratings listed in Table 13-8.
The conclusions of the evaluating or treating physician must constitute substantial evidence so that there has to be
strong evidence of the level of severity of impairment of function with ADLs, work functions, or both, along with a
proper DSM diagnosis of a mental disorder that is causing the impairment of function that is permanent.
This method of evaluating and rating WPI for mental and behavioral impairment for a chronic pain case is elegant
because it follows the law. In Guzman III, the DCA clearly upheld the WCAB in its conclusion that physicians can
rebut a strict WPI rating, provided that the conclusions of the physician as to why a strict rating is not accurate and
an alternative one is, constitute substantial evidence.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.22
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.22 Rating Narcotic Addiction and Dependency
One of the saddest facts of life is that many injured workers fall from being productive members of society to
becoming fully dependent on narcotic medication, losing a quality of life that we all expect and hope for. Substance
abuse is a national problem and not just among injured workers. Even the AMA Guides speak about these people
in Chapter 14, section 14.4e on page 365:
Chronic substance abuse and personality disorders can coincide. The effects of chronic substance abuse
include impairments in concentration, attention, impulse control, judgment, etc., which often last for the duration
of the dependency. These behaviors can also occur with personality disorders. To evaluate the severity of the
impairment, the examiner needs to assess whether there are (1) restrictions in activities of daily living; (2)
difficulties in maintaining social functioning; (3) difficulties in completing tasks in a timely manner because of
deficiencies in concentration, persistence and pace; and (4) repeated episodes of decompensation and loss of
adaptive functioning, averaging three times per year, with each episode lasting 2 or more weeks.
The typical case starts with an industrial injury and evolves into an injured worker’s dependency on opioids,
benzodiazapines, and hypnotics. The opioids are the narcotic pain relievers, the benzodiazapines are the anti-
anxiety medications, and the hypnotics are the sleep medications. Dependency can occur for any one of these
medications or a combination thereof. You do not need to go too far beyond the FDA mandated warnings about
side effects of these drugs that accompany each prescription in order to establish how they can affect a person’s
ADL and work functioning. See Ch. 8, §§ 8.06[26] and 8.07 of this guidebook for a detailed description of these
medications.
If an injured worker with chronic pain syndrome becomes drug dependent, can the drug dependency be rated by
itself? In some cases, yes, if within reasonable medical probability the drug dependency is permanent at the time of
MMI. There are probably three ways such a case can be rated:
• Using the 2005 PDRS for GAF and WPI due to substance abuse disorder that is within all versions of the
DSM
• Using the alternative rating method under Table 13-8 described above as an alternative psychiatric rating
method that uses the AMA Guides to rebut a GAF-WPI rating method
• Using Tables 13-5 (Clinical Dementia Scale), 13-6 (Rating impairment based on mental status), and Table 13-
4 for sleep and arousal disorders
There is a detailed description of how to use Tables 13-5 and 13-6 in the context of a stroke case in Ch. 3, § 3.13 of
this guidebook.
The rationale for rating drug dependency is based on the notion that the cause of the dependency is iatrogenic—
caused by the treating physician, who in recent times, is supposed to be an employer’s physician under a
sanctioned MPN. The problem, for example, is how cheap it is to get a person hooked on a Schedule II narcotic. A
90 day supply of hydrocodone 750 ES (an opioid with acetaminophen, brand name Vicodin) costs about $68.00. An
office visit to a physician to get the prescription for it costs about $98.32. So the injured worker is happy because
the pain goes away if he takes the drug as prescribed, which is up to 4 tablets a day. The claims administrator is
happy because it only costs them under $200.00 every 45 days for medical treatment, and the doctor is happy
because the patient stops whining about being in pain all the time. On a national scale, this is a recipe for
Page 2 of 2
§ 4.22 Rating Narcotic Addiction and Dependency
substance abuse and narcotic dependency. It is true now as it was 50 years ago when doctors prescribed a lot of
Valium to nervous patients. It is an epidemic in the United States, and the FDA is taking steps to reduce the public’s
dependency on these drugs.
However, we are faced with the requirement that all industrially caused permanent impairment result in accurate
WPI ratings. Drug dependent injured workers should be entitled to benefits based on this problem if drug
dependency is permanent, attempts at detoxification do not work, detoxification is not offered by the claims
administrator, or the services are refused by the injured worker due to the underlying dependency.
Tables 13-5 and 13-6 must be utilized together. The evaluating physician scores each impairment under the Clinical
Dementia Scale for memory, orientation, judgment and problem solving, community affairs (including work—
“independent function at usual level in job, …”), home and hobbies, and personal care. The scoring system applies,
and then the WPI is determined by the physician’s use of Table 13-6. Table 13-4, commonly used to this point in
time for sleep disorders, also can be used to determine impairment due to being under the influence of these
medications, which all can cause drowsiness if taken during the day time.
Some attorneys are advocating use of Tables 13-5 and 13-6 in regular psychiatric cases instead of the GAF-WPI
method mandated in the 2005 PDRS or the alternative method using Tables 14-1, ADLs and work function analysis
and Table 13-8 described above in this guidebook. Case law will have to be developed to see whether the WCAB
accepts these methods as either rebuttal to a strict GAF-WPI rating or as a stand-alone rating for drug dependency
due to an industrial injury.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.23
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.23 Multiple System Impairments
The AMA Guides provide a framework to handle a case in which there are multiple impairments in different regions
of the body. A good example is one in which the applicant has coronary heart disease resulting in a heart attack,
coronary by-pass surgery or angioplasty; cardiovascular hypertensive disease, sexual dysfunction, a sleep disorder
and memory loss. Throw in a psychiatric condition like depression with the physical impairments and you have a
complicated case.
The coronary heart disease resulting in the heart attack, by-pass surgery or angioplasty is ratable using AMA
Guides, Chapter 3, Section 3.3, Table 3-6a, page 36. As legal counsel, it is your job to make sure that the physician
first determines what NYHA classification of heart function exists. Then the physician must determine the class of
impairment the applicant has utilizing the criteria listed in Table 3-6a. Then the physician must determine the actual
WPI rating within the class of impairment from Table 3-6a. For example, a Class 2 coronary heart disease
impairment involves a patient with a history of a heart attack and who may require dietary adjustment or medication,
or the patient has a history of angioplasty or coronary artery surgery and may be on medication or dietary
restrictions with at least 7 METs.
The point that you must keep in mind in cases other than orthopedic cases under AMA Guides Chapters 15, 16 and
17 is the effect of an impairment on a person’s ADL functioning. The question of how an impairment affects a
person’s ADL functioning is more important in heart cases than practically any other region of the body. In fact,
impairments for internal medical conditions are driven more by the effects on ADL functioning than any other
regional impairment. Notice how little actual ADL functioning plays a role in either the DRE or ROM methods in
spinal conditions, for example. The same is true for upper extremity and lower extremity impairment ratings. In our
orthopedic cases, we are adding up to 3% WPI if the effects of the orthopedic impairment on ADL functioning is
greater than expected from the underlying rating.
In contrast, in a heart case like the one referenced above, notice the range of impairment ratings within a Class 2
coronary heart disease rating—10%–29% WPI. The physician must explain what percentage within the Class a
patient belongs, depending upon how the heart condition affects his or her ADL functioning. Counsel would be wise
to develop the record with a physician, describing in detail the effects of a heart condition on the applicant’s ADL
functioning because of the range of WPI ratings within a class. A Class 4 coronary heart disease impairment has a
range of 50% WPI to 100% WPI.
Once the rating for the coronary heart disease (CHD) impairment is rated by the physician, a separate rating for the
hypertension is ratable under Chapter 4 of the AMA Guides and then combined with the rating from the CHD using
the Combined Values Chart. But wait! Before anything is combined, you have to determine the WPI ratings for all
medical conditions and then combine the largest WPI rating with the next largest and so on based upon the
instructions in the 2005 PDRS.
In the example above, in addition to having the heart and hypertension conditions, the applicant also has a sleep
disorder, sexual dysfunction and memory loss. Each of these additional conditions are ratable under the AMA
Guides, and the WPI ratings from them would be combined with the other conditions. However, be aware of the
limitation of Labor Code § 4660.1(c) that prohibits or restricts adding impairments for sleep disorders, sexual
dysfunctions, and psychiatric conditions that are caused by a physical injury where the date of injury is on or after
1/1/2013.
Page 2 of 2
§ 4.23 Multiple System Impairments
For sexual dysfunction, you would utilize AMA Guides Chapter 7, Table 7-5, page 156, or if the condition is caused
by neurological factors, then you would utilize AMA Guides Chapter 13, Table 13-21, page 342. Both tables require
a pathophysiological reason for the sexual dysfunction other than subjective complaints, and probably would require
formal testing by physician who is an expert in sexual dysfunction cases.
In many coronary heart disease cases that result in either a heart attack or the use of a heart by-pass machine
during coronary artery grafting surgery, long term memory loss for the patient may occur. This consequence of the
heart attack or surgery can be serious and is ratable separately from the underlying heart condition itself. AMA
Guides Chapter 13, Section 13.3b, pages 313–314, Table 13-4, refers to the Cognitive Dementia Scale that
provides rating impairment due to memory loss and other factors (usually due to a stroke, epilepsy or other brain
injury).
The sleep disturbance or disorder is also ratable, provided that the instructions in the AMA Guides are followed. For
a discussion of the criteria for rating sleep disorders, see the discussion on Sleep Disorders in § 4.24, below.
So, in the example above, multiple medical conditions that are individually ratable under the AMA Guides are
ratable in the same case and are combined resulting in an overall WPI rating.
Can a single physician, like a board certified specialist in internal medicine, rate all of these medical conditions—
coronary heart disease, hypertension, sexual dysfunction, memory loss and sleep disturbance? Assuming that the
medical conditions are work related, the physician may rate impairments that involve medical conditions that are
outside of his or her medical specialty. This is true as long as the physician correctly diagnoses the medical
conditions using nationally accepted standards, correctly applies the AMA Guides, and explains his or her rationale
for his or her opinion and how and why he or she came to the conclusions about diagnosis, medical causation and
apportionment of permanent disability.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.24
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.24 Sleep Disorders
[1] Introduction and Background
There is significant disagreement within the workers’ compensation community about the role that sleep
disorders have on rating permanent disability in cases in which the AMA Guides apply. Hopefully, this section
will clear up any misunderstandings about how and when sleep disorders can be ratable and when they cannot.
The California legislature answered part of the question by enacting new Labor Code § 4660.1 for injuries
occurring on or after 1/1/2013. Section 4660.1(c) prohibits adding impairment ratings for sleep disorders and
sexual dysfunction that are caused by a physical injury.
First of all, sleep that is nocturnal and restful is an ADL pursuant to AMA Guides Chapter 1, Table 1-2, page 4.
Although case law is pending on this issue, common sense tells us that if a person is suffering from a sleep
disorder caused by pain from an industrial injury and because sleep is an ADL affected by the injury, then up to
3% WPI can be added to the underlying impairment rating that is causing the pain. However, Labor Code
§ 4660.1(c) calls this into question for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 since that section prohibits adding
impairments for sleep disorders, psychiatric impairments, and sexual dysfunction that are caused by a physical
injury. This probably applies across the board, whether the sleep disorder or sexual dysfunction is an up to 3%
WPI pain related impairment affecting ADLs or as a stand-alone WPI rating. Case law will have to develop to
determine whether or not up to 3% WPI pain related impairment can include consideration of sleep disorder or
sexual dysfunction as part of the ADL listing analysis pursuant to Table 1-2 on page 4 in the AMA Guides.
In fact, conservative physicians will indicate in their reports that sleep disturbance is already included within the
impairment rating given for the underlying medical condition. Liberal physicians will want to add up to 3%,
arguing that the sleep disturbance is not already included in the underlying rating and that since sleep is an
ADL listed in the AMA Guides, then up to 3% WPI can be added. Alternatively, liberal physicians will want to
rate any sleep disorder that is related to an industrial injury, regardless of its cause, including pain.
[2] Is Sleep Disorder Ratable?
So can a sleep disturbance or disorder be ratable in its own right? The answer is “yes” as long as the cause of
the sleep disorder is not pain from an underlying injury. There has to be a direct cause or a link between the
industrial injury and the sleep disorder other than pain. But how is a sleep disorder diagnosed?
If you do some medical research on the subject of sleep disorders, you will discover that there is an entire
chapter of the DSM-IV TR devoted to sleep disorders—how to diagnose, evaluate and categorize them. In the
introduction to sleep disorders, the authors of the DSM-IV state unequivocally that in order to diagnose a sleep
disorder, there must be polysomnography performed in a sleep laboratory. The DSM-IV TR categorizes sleep
disorders into different types that include forms of insomnia (not enough sleep), hypersomnia (too much sleep)
and such disorders as narcolepsy, sleep disorders associated with a psychiatric condition (e.g., clinical
depression), sleep disorders associated with a medical condition (e.g., head injury), and substance induced
sleep disorders (associated with use of a substance including medications).
The other problem with sleep disorders is that it is very difficult to predict whether a sleep disorder is
permanent. We know that long term use of sleep medication is contraindicated; in fact, long term use of sleep
medication can cause a substance induced sleep disorder. The argument is that if a patient needs sleep
medication, then there is a sleep disorder that needs to be evaluated without use of medication, much like a
hearing loss is evaluated without hearing aids.
Page 2 of 4
§ 4.24 Sleep Disorders
But once you have a diagnosis of a sleep disorder under the DSM-IV TR, does the applicant have to be
evaluated using the 2005 PDRS for psychiatric conditions, with the limitations of Labor Code § 3208.3, a final
GAF score, and a 40% increase for the DFEC adjustment? Remember, Labor Code § 4660(b)(1) mandates that
we use the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides to determine permanent disability [see [3],
below].
For now, we are taking a strict approach to the issue of when a sleep disorder can be rated in a workers’
compensation case. Case law may clarify some of the controversies that arise in cases that involve an
allegation of a sleep disorder.
For injuries occurring prior to 1/1/2013, there are three choices of how a sleep disorder may apply in a given
case:
1. A sleep disorder is already included in the underlying impairment’s WPI rating.
2. A sleep disorder can have up to 3% WPI added as part of page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS that relates to
pain related impairment add-ons.
3. Sleep disorder is a stand-alone WPI rating using Table 13-4.
Medical evidence has to support one of the three choices in any given case. But remember the limitation of the
application of this to injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, which prohibits adding WPI ratings for sleep
disorders and sexual dysfunction as a result of a physical injury. The question will exist until case law
establishes any exceptions to this in cases such as a serious head injury that includes a sleep disorder, sexual
dysfunction, or both, where the date of injury is on or after 1/1/2013.
[3] AMA Guides Discussion of Sleep Disorders
Since sleep is a function of the brain and central nervous system, we need to look at AMA Guides Chapter 13,
The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, Section 13.3c, Arousal and Sleep Disorders, page 317, Table 13-
4, which is operative in our cases. The instructions on page 317 are controlling:
It is expected that the diagnosis of excessive daytime sleepiness has been supported by formal studies in
a sleep laboratory
The clinician can evaluate sleepiness with the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, which assesses the likelihood of
dozing … in different situations … [footnote omitted]
This type of emphatic language in the AMA Guides is precisely the tone used in academic medicine to stress a
point. If you ask most clinical practitioners, they will almost uniformly agree that you do not need a
polysomnogram in every case in order to diagnose a sleep disorder. In a clinical medical practice, if a patient
presents to a psychiatrist or psychologist with objective evidence of depression and an anxious state, with a
haggard countenance, it is probable that the patient has a ratable sleep disorder.
However, the AMA Guides do not have any qualifying language to the contrary, and together with the
instructions in the DSM-IV TR, if you have a case in which a sleep disorder is suspected or claimed, then a
polysomnogram is required. In addition, a Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT) is also recommended to see
how a person’s sleep latency (how long it takes to fall asleep) affects ADL functioning. These studies generally
take 21 consecutive hours in a sleep laboratory and can cost up to $3,600 under the current fee schedule.
There is an argument being made by some physicians that for a Class I or Class II sleep disorder rating under
Table 13-4, only an Epworth Sleepiness Scale is needed. But if you read the actual instructions in the AMA
Guides page 317, there is no qualifying language when the authors state “it is expected” that sleep studies be
conducted in a laboratory. All an Epworth Sleepiness Scale consists of is a self report visual analog scale of
eight questions, worth up to 3 points each. If a patient scores 10 points, he or she has a Class II sleep disorder
impairment rating under Table 13-4, which is a 10%–29% WPI stand alone impairment rating.
A Class II sleep disorder rating of 10% WPI to 29% WPI involves “Reduced daytime alertness, interferes with
ability to perform some ADLs.” This covers just about everyone during our MCLE seminars! Realistically, a
person who has a sleep disorder has very serious problems—personally, socially and occupationally—and this
diagnosis should never be taken lightly. For example, a patient who wakes up once an hour is not getting
adequate sleep and usually is visible in that person’s countenance. A sleep study in a sleep laboratory will
Page 3 of 4
§ 4.24 Sleep Disorders
show restorative sleep with deep delta waves and adequate rapid eye movement time (i.e., at least 90 minutes
of REM a night). So again, development of the record is essential if an applicant is claiming a sleep disorder.
PRACTICE POINT:
Defense counsel is urged to take the deposition of the applicant if a sleep disorder is alleged in order to
determine whether the condition is caused by pain from an injury. In addition, other causative factors
can be discovered, such as allergies to a pillow, an animal that sleeps in the same room, or a spouse
or significant other who snores and disrupts the applicant’s sleep patterns. Remember, 25% of the
adult population suffers from a diagnosable sleep disorder. People who live in cities have a greater
incidence of sleep disorders than the population who lives in rural areas. So the cause of sleep
disorders can be multifactoral. A good benchmark to determine, subjectively, if someone has a sleep
disorder is if he or she wakes up once an hour or is one who regularly sleeps less than 6.5 hours per
night.
PRACTICE POINT:
Attorneys who represent applicants have to be circumspect before you allege a sleep disorder since, in
many cases, if a person has diminished day time alertness, his or her driver’s license may be in
jeopardy, and physicians have a statutory duty to report anyone who has a neurological condition that
may affect his or her ability to safely operate a motor vehicle.
The instructions on page 317 of the AMA Guides list some examples of medical conditions that can result in a
sleep disorder that are ratable under Table 13-4, such as traumatic brain injury, stroke, Alzheimer’s Disease,
depression and other diseases and disorders. The language on page 317 indicates that sleep disorders can be
caused by or linked to other conditions not listed as examples on page 317—i.e., the list on that page is not
exclusive.
Notice also that depression is listed on page 317 and sleep disorders can arise from depression. This
correlates with the DSM-IV diagnosis of a sleep disorder associated with a psychiatric condition. The question
is how much of a person’s impairment and effects on ADL functioning is caused by the depression and how
much is caused by the sleep disorder? The treating or evaluating physician would have to either give an overall
DSM-IV differential diagnosis with the GAF score for both the sleep disorder and the depression together as
one rating or a GAF score only for the depression and a separate rating under Table 13-4 for the sleep disorder
under the AMA Guides.
[4] Checklist for Sleep Disorder Claims
If there is a claim for sleep disorder in any case, the following is recommended:
1. If a medical doctor suspects a sleep disorder, a referral to a qualified sleep laboratory is in order if the
sleep disorder is not caused by pain.
2. If the sleep disorder is caused by pain, then you treat the underlying condition that is causing the pain,
i.e., pain management program, more aggressive medical or surgical treatment. Forget about a sleep
study. Add up to 3% for pain related impairment using the 2005 PDRS, page 1-12.
3. If a sleep disorder exists, the type and category should be diagnosed by a medical doctor (preferably a
psychiatrist) or psychologist using the DSM-IV criteria.
4. An Epworth Sleepiness Scale should be performed at least a few times to obtain consistent results, if
possible.
Page 4 of 4
§ 4.24 Sleep Disorders
5. An analysis by the medical doctor or psychologist should be made to determine the class of sleep and
arousal disorder impairment under Table 13-4.
6. The physician determines the WPI rating within a class, stating how and why the patient falls into a class
and rating within that class along with the cause or link of the sleep disorder to the industrial injury.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.25
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.25 Obstructive Sleep Apnea
The medical condition of obstructive sleep apnea has been seen in some workers’ compensation cases, albeit
rarely. This condition is a very serious medical condition that can be fatal. The AMA Guides discuss sleep apnea in
three different chapters: Chapter 5, The Respiratory System, on page 105 for obstructive sleep apnea; Chapter 11,
The Ear, Nose, Throat and Related Structures, on page 259 for upper airway sleep apnea; and Chapter 13, The
Central and Peripheral Nervous System, discussed below. The authors of AMA Guides Chapter 11 refer you to
Chapter 5, page 105, for rating purposes.
Obstructive sleep apnea means that the patient has intermittent occlusions of the upper airway during sleep that
causes the person to suffer lack of oxygen (hypoxia), loud snoring, and repeatedly waking up resulting in disrupted
sleep patterns. A person with obstructive sleep apnea lacks restful sleep, daytime somnolence, cognitive
dysfunction, and hypertension.
Central sleep apnea is caused by central nervous system disorders such as brain tumor, head trauma or any
neurologically based causes, and is listed in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, page 317,
under Sleep and Arousal Impairments, discussed in § 4.24, above.
Again, the correct diagnosis is essential and requires sleep studies in a reputable sleep laboratory along with
positive atmospheric pressure testing after breathing tests during stages of sleep. The authors of the AMA Guides
on page 105 state that obstructive sleep apnea can have a devastating effect on a patient’s ADL functioning and
personal, social and occupational functioning.
Curiously, the authors indicate that the impairment rating for sleep apnea should be performed by a “sleep
specialist.” There is no definition of a “sleep specialist” in the AMA Guides, and it remains to be seen whether that
person is a neurologist, psychiatrist, internist, chiropractor, or who knows? Legally, anyone can become an expert
as long as the person can justify their expertise based upon education, experience, skills, abilities, knowledge and
practice [see Evidence Code § 720].
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.26
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.26 Fibromyalgia
[1] Introduction and Background
Fibromyalgia is probably the most controversial medical diagnosis involved in workers’ compensation litigation.
Fibromyalgia was originally called “myositis,” “fibromyositis,” or “myofacial pain syndrome”, among other labels.
The diagnosis is one of exclusion by a physician, meaning that the diagnosing physician must rule out any
other systemic and non-systemic medical condition.
There are no objective laboratory tests that can diagnose a patient with fibromyalgia. Microscopically, muscle
tissue, tendons, ligaments and other soft tissue structures are normal in fibromyalgia patients as are blood
tests. There are some theories being tested that may indicate that the condition is linked to hormone levels,
brain chemistry or some other metabolic disorder, but the medical evidence is being developed and there is
nothing conclusive as to the biologic nature of the disorder.
The fact is that fibromyalgia is a disorder; it is not a disease process. People who have the condition usually
have severe symptoms with devastating effects on their ADL functioning, sometimes resulting in total
incapacitation. The condition is rarely seen in clinical medicine worldwide, but the American College of
Rheumatology has international conferences in which the data from other countries confirm the existence of the
disorder with similar incidence in the population. About 3% of the population has the disorder, with a 3 to 1 ratio
of women to men having the condition. This is the information that is known about fibromyalgia.
The first thing that is not known about fibromyalgia is its etiology—no one knows what causes the condition to
develop in a patient. How many times have you seen what starts off as a routine carpal tunnel syndrome case
and then after wrist surgery, all heck breaks loose and the applicant has the signs and symptoms of
fibromyalgia? These cases have proven to be among the most expensive workers’ compensation cases in
history. Why is it that some people develop the condition while others do not under similar circumstances? The
same question is asked about why is it that 20% of the population with hand-intensive work activities will
develop an overuse syndrome, while 80% of the population do not? There is no answer. Epidemiologists can
only give population incidences of certain medical conditions and not trace their causes in cases like this.
Perhaps there is a genetic component that has not yet been discovered that makes a person vulnerable to
developing fibromyalgia or carpal tunnel syndrome. We do not know the answers to these questions, and
science may provide answers in the future.
For now, we do know that California law recognizes any medical condition that is caused, aggravated,
accelerated or linked to an industrial injury can itself be considered “industrially related.” But now that the AMA
Guides are in place, some defense attorneys are saying that fibromyalgia claims are “dead in the water” under
the AMA Guides because the authors of the AMA Guides do not recognize fibromyalgia as a ratable medical
condition. In order to determine whether or not that contention is correct, you must look at the language in the
AMA Guides [see [2], below].
[2] Inconsistency in AMA Guides Regarding Fibromyalgia
Remember, each chapter of the AMA Guides was written by different sets of authors. There are inconsistent
statements in the AMA Guides about fibromyalgia between the instructions in Chapter 1 of the AMA Guides
relating to medical conditions that are new, complex or not listed in the AMA Guides, and Chapter 18, Pain,
which mentions fibromyalgia by name.
Page 2 of 4
§ 4.26 Fibromyalgia
As mentioned earlier in this guidebook, physicians are instructed to rate medical conditions not listed in the
AMA Guides by analogy. Chapter 1 of the AMA Guides, Section 1.5, page 11, states:
The Guides nonetheless provides a framework for evaluating new or complex conditions …. In situations
where impairment ratings are not provided, the Guides suggest that physicians use clinical judgment,
comparing measurable impairments resulting from the unlisted condition to measurable impairment
resulting from similar conditions with similar impairment of function in performing activities of daily living.
But then AMA Guides Chapter 18, Section 18.2, pages 568 and 569, states as follows:
[T]he diagnosis of fibromyalgia is based on individuals’ reports of widespread pain and their reports of
tenderness during physical examination. Despite extensive research, no specific underlying biological
abnormality has been discovered to explain the reports of these people … . Finally, as in the case of
fibromyalgia, reliable diagnostic criteria exist, but physicians disagree about whether the condition
diagnosed by use of these criteria has a specific biologic basis.
Remember, there is controversy in general medicine as well with respect to fibromyalgia. Some physicians
believe that many psychiatric conditions do not have a biological basis. There are some physicians who do not
believe that repetitive keyboarding on a computer can cause carpal tunnel syndrome. So the politics of
medicine are involved in these statements. The authors of Chapter 18 of the AMA Guides at page 569 go on to
state:
The controversies described above cannot be resolved in this chapter [18] of the Guides for the simple
reason that the medical community has not achieved consensus about how to construe such conditions as
myofascial pain syndrome, fibromyalgia, and “disputed neurogenic” thoracic outlet syndrome. [footnote
omitted]
[3] Is Fibromyalgia Ratable?
So is fibromyalgia “dead in the water” in our workers’ compensation cases because of the above-quoted
language in Chapter 18 of the AMA Guides [see [2], above]? There are two schools of thought in the matter.
What the authors of the AMA Guides seem to agree is that fibromyalgia is a diagnosable medical condition, but
there is no currently known biological basis for it. Some physicians are following the language in Chapter 18 of
the AMA Guides quoted above, indicating that fibromyalgia is not ratable under the Guides, while other
physicians are applying the language in Chapter 1 of the AMA Guides, also quoted above, and rating
fibromyalgia by analogy. Some rheumatologists are not rating fibromyalgia at all, but are deferring a rating to a
psychiatrist for somatoform pain disorder or somatization disorder under the DSM-IV.
In order to understand the point about rating fibromyalgia under the AMA Guides by analogy or not rating it and
deferring to a psychiatrist for a psychiatric rating, you need to understand the diagnostic criteria for fibromyalgia
and compare them to the diagnostic criteria for somatoform pain disorder and somatization disorder.
The diagnostic criteria developed by the American College of Rheumatology, which has been accepted by
other medical specialties, are as follows:
• Widespread pain, tenderness and stiffness of muscles, tendon insertions and adjacent soft tissue
• Flu-like symptoms of fatigue and malaise
• Sleep disturbance (See page 599 of DSM-IV TR, which refers to unusual brain wave patterns in some
patients with fibromyalgia)
• Lack of energy
• Depression
• Positive “tender points” 4.4 kg pressure (ACR Vancouver Protocols)
• Irritable bowel syndrome in some cases
• Affects ADLs
• Population 3%, 3-1 female to male ratio
Page 3 of 4
§ 4.26 Fibromyalgia
• Extremely debilitating and incapacitating symptoms
The diagnostic criteria for somatoform pain disorder, from the DSM-IV TR are as follows:
• Condition lasts over 6 months
• Pain is predominant focus and is severe enough to warrant clinical attention
• Pain causes clinically significant impairment in social, occupational or other functioning
• Psychological factors have important role in the onset, severity, exacerbation or maintenance of the pain
• Symptoms are not feigned or intentionally produced
• Pain is not better accounted for by mood, anxiety or other disorder
• Pain disorder associated with psychological factors—psyche factors are the major role in onset, severity,
exacerbation or maintenance of pain disorder
• Pain disorder associated with both psychological and a general medical condition—both factors are
judged to have major roles in the onset, severity, exacerbation or maintenance of the pain.
The diagnostic criteria for somatization disorder from the DSM-IV TR are as follows:
• History of many physical complaints beginning before age 30 over a period of years, resulting in treatment
or significant impairment in social, occupational or other functioning
• Four pain symptoms—a history of pain related to at least four sites or functions
• Two gastrointestinal symptoms other than pain
• One sexual symptom
• One pseudoneurological symptom (e.g., memory loss, localized weakness)
• Above symptoms cannot be explained
• Effects of symptoms on functioning are greater than would be expected from history, physical findings or
lab findings
• The symptoms are not feigned or intentionally produced
The diagnostic criteria for fibromyalgia, somatoform pain disorder and somtization disorder are markedly
similar. In our post-SB 899 era and for injuries on or after 1/1/05, we are seeing two schools of thought on
whether fibromyalgia cases are ratable under the AMA Guides. One school of thought rates the symptoms
under the AMA Guides by analogy, while the other school of thought rates the condition under a psychiatric
condition.
The physicians who rate fibromyalgia by analogy will use the following type of analysis:
Rate fibromyalgia using AMA Guides:
• Primary medical condition directly caused by industrial injury (usually an orthopedic condition rated under
AMA Chapters 15, 16, or 17).
• Chapter 13, Table 13-4 sleep disorders
• Chapter 13, Table 13-8 emotional or behavioral disorders
• Chapter 6, Table 6-3 irritable bowel syndrome
• Chapter 9, Table 9-2 anemia (fatigue by analogy)
• Chapter 9, Table 9-3 white blood count (fatigue by analogy)
• Muscle weakness in Chapters 16 and 17 for orthopedic complaints of lack of energy
• This assumes fibromyalgia condition is primarily a central nervous system disorder
Page 4 of 4
§ 4.26 Fibromyalgia
The other school of thought is for the physician to rate the condition as a psychiatric condition under the
diagnosis of either a somatoform pain disorder or somatization disorder using the DSM-IV TR criteria. But as
the saying goes, “be careful what you wish for.” If an applicant with fibromyalgia is diagnosed by a psychiatrist
with one of the above mentioned psychiatric conditions because of the symptoms of fibromyalgia, then the
provisions of Labor Code § 3208.3 apply (six months of employment, psychiatric condition is predominantly
caused by actual events of employment, use of the GAF score, etc. [see Rolda vs. Pitney Bowes, Inc. (2001)
66 Cal. Comp. Cases 241 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]. In addition, the FEC adjustment for the WPI
rating from the GAF score is increased by 40% to obtain a standard permanent disability rating [see Ch. 2 of
this guidebook on rating psychiatric cases]. Plus, if the applicant has a clinical depression in addition to the
fibromyalgia diagnosis, there may be more than one psychiatric condition that results in ratable permanent
disability.
Rating an applicant with fibromyalgia under the DSM-IV TR would require that a rheumatologist first diagnose
the patient with fibromyalgia and then defer the permanent disability rating to a psychiatrist who would then
have to determine whether the applicant meets the diagnostic criteria for a psychiatric condition that is work
related. There cannot be separate ratings for fibromyalgia by both a rheumatologist using the AMA Guides and
a psychiatrist using the DSM-IV TR and the 2005 PDRS because the ratings would be from overlapping factors
of impairments.
We are seeing AME quality rheumatologists continue to diagnose fibromyalgia in our cases and rate permanent
disability using the AMA Guides by analogy. See, for example, a WCAB “noteworthy” panel decision of Mrozek-
Payne v. Spectre Air & Ground Freight [2012 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 147] in which the AME utilized
Tables 13-4 (sleep and arousal disorders) and Table 13-8 (mental and behavioral disorders) and rated
fibromyalgia by analogy. The WCAB panel, in upholding this rating method, cited page 11 of the AMA Guides
that mandates that a physician use his or her clinical judgment in order to accurately rate a medical condition
that is not listed in the AMA Guides but which causes impairment of function.
We are seeing an equal number of AME quality rheumatologists defer rating applicants with fibromyalgia to a
psychiatrist for a psychiatric rating instead. Rating fibromyalgia cases under a psychiatric condition result in
enormous permanent disability ratings because of the FEC adjustment for psychiatric conditions under the
2005 PDRS for injuries prior to 1/1/2013. Since most fibromyalgia conditions are associated with an initial
orthopedic injury, if the fibromyalgia is rated using a psychiatric based rating model, that strategy may legally be
challenged if the date of injury is on or after 1/1/2013 since Labor Code § 4660.1(c) excludes adding impairment
ratings for psychiatric conditions that are caused by a physical injury, if an injury is not “catastrophic.” See Ch. 2
of this guidebook for a discussion of Labor Code § 4660.1(c).
Rating fibromyalgia cases using the AMA Guides also may result in high permanent disability ratings because
of the multiple ratable conditions that exist in the AMA Guides, e.g., an underlying orthopedic condition
combined with a Class II Sleep Disorder combined with irritable bowel syndrome combined with memory loss
(“fibro fog” as some patients and physicians call it).
The controversy about fibromyalgia will not end here but in the court room where workers’ compensation judges
will have to decide whether fibromyalgia can still be rated, and, if so, how. The judicial determinations will rest
on the evidence presented, how well counsel have developed the record, and how well reasoned and thorough
the medical reports are that support the physicians’ conclusions.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.27
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.27 Pain Add-Ons
We are seeing medical reports from treating and evaluating physicians that do not comply with the 2005 PDRS and
Chapter 18 of the AMA Guides concerning pain related impairment ratings. Counsel should make sure treating and
evaluating physicians are familiar with the instructions on page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS since those instructions set
the guidelines on how and when up to 3% WPI can be added to an underlying rating from the AMA Guides.
Physicians need to be familiar with AMA Guides Chapter 18, Section 18.3f, page 575. The instructions on page 575
tell the physician to first use the pain questionnaire on pages 576–577, Table 18-4. Then the physician is instructed
to classify the patient’s pain in one of four classes on page 575, Table 18-3, based upon the clinical examination
and questionnaire results. Finally, the physician may add up to 3% WPI for any impairment when the rating does
not adequately reflect the effect of the impairment on the applicant’s ADL functioning. If there are multiple
impairments, the physician may add up to only 3% WPI for the entire case, allocating the 3% among the different
impairments, if appropriate.
The physician cannot add up to 3% WPI for each part of body injured in a case. The physician must indicate which
injured region results in an impairment that has a greater than expected burden on the applicant’s ADL functioning
than is accounted for in the underlying WPI rating, Then and only then can the physician add up to 3% WPI for pain
related impairments, allocating the 3% to different parts of the body if appropriate.
The physicians in our cases have to be reminded that the 3% WPI pain add-on applies only if the impairment has
greater than expected effects on the person’s ADL functioning than accounted for by the underlying rating. Can a
physician add up to 3% WPI for pain related impairment in the absence of a ratable impairment from Chapters 3
through 17 of the AMA Guides? Probably not, even though there are some cases we have seen where the
physician did exactly that. There must be a pathophysiological explanation for an underlying impairment rating in
order for there to be an up to 3% WPI add on for pain related impairment. If there is no underlying WPI impairment
rating, then there cannot be a pain related up to 3% WPI add-on. See the discussion on 0% WPI ratings in § 4.28,
below.
In many of our cases, physicians are adding 3% WPI for pain to the overall rating without specifying to which region
or part of body the pain add-on applies and why. For example, in a specific injury case involving the lumbar spine,
right knee and left shoulder, the physician’s statement that “The effects of this injury on the applicant’s ADL
functioning is greater than expected from the underlying impairment ratings and I believe there should be a 3% WPI
add-on due to the applicant’s pain levels” is not substantial evidence because the physician failed to indicate to
which body part(s) the 3% WPI add-on for pain applies.
Can a physician add up to 3% WPI separately for multiple injuries? For example, if there is a specific injury to the
lumbar spine and a continuous trauma injury to bilateral wrists and the applicant became permanent and stationary
at the same time, the physician can only add up to 3% WPI for pain related impairments that are greater than
expected from either the lumbar spine impairment or the bilateral wrist impairment or both in combination. The
physician would have to specify what part of the 3% WPI applies to the spine or wrist ratings and why. This is
because the pain related WPI up to 3% rating can apply only to the whole person and not per part of body injured.
Therefore, it would be improper for the physician to add 3% WPI for pain for the lumbar spine rating and another
3% WPI for the bilateral wrists impairment rating.
Page 2 of 2
§ 4.27 Pain Add-Ons
On the other hand, if the applicant has two separate injuries resulting in different permanent and stationary dates,
the physician could hypothetically add up to 3% WPI for pain related impairments in accordance with the 2005
PDRS and Chapter 18 of the AMA Guides for each injury. For example, if the applicant sustains a specific injury to
his or her lumbar spine at one time and later sustains another specific injury to his or her left shoulder, the
evaluating or treating physicians can assess the impairments for each injury and determine whether the underlying
WPI rating adequately reflects the effects of the impairment on the applicant’s ADL functioning, and, if not, can add
up to 3% WPI for each injury. So applicant’s counsel needs to make the argument that the applicant became
permanent and stationary at separate times in order to justify a 3% WPI add-on for pain related impairment for each
injury. Defense counsel will argue that the 3% WPI applies only to the whole person regardless of the number of
injuries. Case law will need to be developed to determine the outcome of this very interesting issue.
Can a judge add up to 3% WPI for pain pursuant to the 2005 PDRS if a physician does not? The problem is that in
Chapter 18 of the AMA Guides the authors indicate that the physician determines the effect of an impairment on the
patient’s ADL functioning and can add up to 3% WPI if the effects of the impairment on the person’s ADL
functioning is greater than expected from the underlying rating. On the other hand, the 2005 PDRS on page 1-12
does not specify that the up to 3% WPI pain add-on is required to be determined by a physician.
Hypothetically, a judge could apply the 2005 PDRS at page 1-12 unilaterally under two circumstances. First, if the
treating or evaluating physician completely fails to describe the effects of an impairment on the applicant’s ADL
functioning at the time of MMI, a judge may impose the up to 3% add-on if there is sufficient evidence at trial to
support it. Secondly, if the treating or evaluating physician failed to adequately describe the effects of the
impairment on the applicant’s ADL functioning at time of MMI and the applicant’s condition has or has not changed
since the MMI medical examination, a judge could impose the up to 3% WPI add-on. Again, case law will have to
be developed to determine the authority of a judge to apply the 3% WPI pain add-on.
Even though it has been over seven years since the Administrative Director adopted the 2005 PDRS, physicians
are still not complying with the instructions in the PDRS concerning the 3% pain add-on when they combine the
underlying WPI rating with up to 3% for pain related impairments. Counsel should always remind treating and
evaluating physicians that the pain related impairment, if any, is an add-on to the underlying WPI and is not
combined with the underlying WPI rated condition. So, for example, the following is not substantial evidence: “The
patient has a DRE Category V 28% WPI for his spinal condition and an additional 3% WPI should be combined due
to the above-described effect of the pain related impairment on the patient’s ADL functioning. The final WPI rating is
therefore 30%.” The correct conclusion would have the physician add the 3% WPI to the underlying 28% WPI DRE
Category V rating for an overall 31% WPI, before adjustment for age, occupation and FEC, or 1.4 adjustment factor,
depending on the date of injury.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.28
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.28 Zero Percent Impairment Ratings
A vexing problem for applicant, judge, Information and Assistance Officer and applicant attorneys is the 0% WPI
rating after a permanent and stationary report is received from a treating or evaluating physician. A 0% WPI rating
in which a physician opines that the applicant is a “qualified injured worker” is even more vexing, especially if the
injury occurs on or after 1/1/04 when vocational rehabilitation was repealed.
In fact, some industrial injuries will result in a 0% WPI rating simply because the applicant recovered from the
effects of the injury and there is no effect on the person’s ADL functioning. Many physicians have not shied away
from imposing prophylactic work restrictions in a case in which the AMA Guides apply because they think,
erroneously, that doing so is “fair” or will result in some kind of settlement for the applicant, despite the applicant
having no residual impairment from the industrial injury.
When counsel sees a treating or evaluating physician’s MMI report that rates 0% WPI, red flags must emerge and
certain factors must be determined first before relying on the medical conclusion that there is no permanent
impairment from an injury. Of immediate concern is whether the industrial injury affects the applicant’s ADL
functioning at the time the physician declares the applicant permanent and stationary. If so, then the 0% permanent
impairment rating may not constitute substantial evidence.
The main issue that must be determined is whether the treating or evaluating physician applied the AMA Guides
correctly in his or her medical conclusion that there is no permanent impairment. Chances are that the physician did
not evaluate the case correctly under the AMA Guides, especially if the injury resulted in surgery or otherwise was
serious enough to cause the applicant to miss significant time from work. If the applicant still has deficits in ADL
functioning due to the industrial injury, the question is “why?”
For example, if a physician concludes in a spinal injury case that the applicant has a DRE Category I rating that
rates 0% WPI, a back or neck sprain with no objective findings, is that based upon substantial evidence—did the
physician state why he or she concluded that the case falls under DRE Category I, or why the case does not fall
under DRE Category II or why the ROM method does not apply? Some physicians believe that a back strain or
sprain should include a prophylactic restriction because a patient with a sprain with some minor disc bulges may be
at risk of recurrence. If this is the case, one could argue that if there is a history of recurrent back sprains from an
original industrial injury resulting in a prophylactic restriction, then the physician, arguably, may be able to justify a
DRE Category II impairment rating or he or she may utilize the ROM method by analogy, arguing that a case like
this falls into the “DRE Gap” and the ROM better describes the impairment.
For another example: The applicant has a partial medial meniscus surgery and the physician fails to use AMA
Guides Table 17-33, which gives a DBE rating for a partial meniscectomy of 1% WPI. Did the same physician fail to
state how the applicant’s current knee condition affects his or her ADL functioning for standing, walking, stair
climbing and lifting?
In a significant injury case, it is unlikely that a WPI rating would result in a 0% permanent disability proposed
settlement and adjusters, legal counsel, judges and Information and Assistance Officers must scrutinize the medical
report that formed the basis of the 0% permanent disability rating.
Page 2 of 3
§ 4.28 Zero Percent Impairment Ratings
What about a case that involves a sub-clinical carpal tunnel syndrome condition or tendonitis of the wrists with
negative electro-diagnostic findings, i.e., the EMG/NCV testing is negative for sensory or motor latencies and the
applicant has normal ranges of motion of the wrist joints? Suppose the physician writes in the MMI report, “no
permanent impairment but the patient must rest 15 minutes for every hour of using a keyboard”. Is the “no
impairment” conclusion substantial evidence?
From a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides, there probably is no permanent impairment. A liberal interpretation
would require an impairment rating based upon the fact that a prophylactic restriction is intended to prevent future
pathology that based upon reasonable medical probability will result if the activity is not avoided. A physician could
then by analogy impose some kind of impairment rating for the hand/wrist tendonitis or sub-clinical carpal tunnel
syndrome under “other disorders” in Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides. The other alternative is for the physician to not
impose prophylactic restrictions at all, which would justify a 0% WPI rating. In some cases, the sub-clinical condition
will eventually evolve into a clinically significant condition and may result in a ratable impairment. Nevertheless, the
physician must follow the instructions in the AMA Guides for strict ratings by referring to the specific assessment of
carpal tunnel syndrome on page 495 of the Guides that minimally requires evaluation of the patient using Tables
16-10, 16-11, and 16-15 as described in Ch. 3, § 3.16 of this guidebook.
What happens if there is a 0% WPI rating from a treating or evaluating physician but the physician concludes that
the applicant is a “qualified injured worker?” The only way this could happen is if the physician imposes prophylactic
work restrictions, such as “no very heavy lifting” for a construction worker in a lumbar sprain case. In this example
and in the prior one, the very imposition of a permanent prophylactic work restriction implies that there should also
be an impairment rating that goes along with the work restriction. Physicians should be informed that if they feel
obligated to a patient to impose any permanent work restrictions, then there should also be a corresponding
impairment rating under the AMA Guides; otherwise, their report does not constitute substantial evidence.
Physicians should either find and justify a WPI rating using the AMA Guides in such cases or completely eliminate
any permanent work restrictions when the applicant is declared MMI and permanent and stationary with a 0% WPI
rating.
This is going to get even more vexing for injured workers who receive a 0% WPI but the physician issues the one-
page restriction of activities and residual functional capacity form that is required in all cases after 1/1/2013 that
allows that physician to determine whether the injured employee can return to regular, modified or alternative work
when his or her condition is MMI. This one-page report will set the stage for supplemental job displacement benefits
and will put pressure on employers to comply with state and federal anti-discrimination laws, such as the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act [see Lab. Code § 4658.7].
The point of these examples is to show that counsel needs to develop the record in order to obtain an accurate
permanent impairment rating by taking the physician’s deposition or asking for supplemental reports from the
physician to establish the physician’s knowledge, or lack thereof, of the AMA Guides and how they apply in a given
case.
In certain cases, a workers’ compensation judge could make a finding of a “nominal” permanent disability based
upon Labor Code § 5802 in a case in which the treating or evaluating physician does not find any ratable
impairment under the AMA Guides. However, the judge must have a medical-legal reason to justify use of that
section—perhaps when there is some evidence of a permanent prophylactic work restriction.
Labor Code § 5802 is quoted as follows:
If, in any proceeding under this division, it is proved that an injury has been suffered for which the employer
would be liable to pay compensation if disability had resulted therefrom, but it is not proved that any disability
has resulted, the appeals board may, instead of dismissing the application, award a nominal disability
indemnity, if it appears that disability is likely to result at a future time.
Defendants may argue that a 0% WPI rating means no permanent disability pursuant to Labor Code §§ 4660 and
4660.1, which are newer in time than Labor Code § 5802, which allows a judicially imposed nominal permanent
Page 3 of 3
§ 4.28 Zero Percent Impairment Ratings
disability. However, a judge has a duty to weigh the evidence and determine the existence of any permanent
disability arising out of an industrial injury, and imposing a nominal permanent disability award in such cases may
not be unreasonable under certain circumstances. But if you are an applicant’s legal counsel, be careful what you
wish for because today’s nominal permanent disability could become tomorrow’s prior award pursuant to Labor
Code § 4664 that is subtracted from a 100% or life pension permanent disability rating for that prior “nominal
permanent disability” award.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.29
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.29 Headaches
Among controversial medical conditions that we see in our workers’ compensation cases are headaches, which is
one of the most common reasons people seek medical attention across the nation and the world. But can
headaches be rated for permanent impairment under the AMA Guides? Can you prove that a person’s headaches
are “permanent” enough for an impairment rating?
The only significant places in the AMA Guides where any mention is made of headaches are on page 567 and
Table 18-1 on page 571 in Chapter 18, Pain. Most headaches are considered by the authors of Chapter 18 to be
one of the well-established pain syndromes without significant definable tissue pathology or measurable organ
dysfunction to explain the pain. The authors acknowledge on page 567: “Headache disorders are also a major
cause of work loss.” But they go on to say that “most” headaches cannot be rated under any other chapter in the
AMA Guides.
However, the authors caution that science can change and the list of well-established pain syndromes that are not
accounted for in other chapters of the AMA Guides can also be modified. The authors imply that most headaches
can only be rated under Chapter 18, which by the constructs of our 2005 PDRS mean that a WPI rating can be
increased by up to 3%. In order to rate headaches only under Chapter 18, pay close attention to the authors’
instructions for conditions like headaches in Section 18.3a on page 570:
Individuals with these well-established pain syndromes can be evaluated on the basis of concepts elaborated
in this chapter. These individuals must have symptoms and signs that can plausibly be attributed to a well-
defined medical condition … The list [in Table 18-1] is not comprehensive and may change as the body of
medical information about various pain syndromes grows. If an examiner determines that an individual has a
diagnosis that is not on the list, he or she may rate the individual’s pain-related impairment if he or she is
convinced that the diagnosed condition is well recognized and that the pain-related impairment is a
consequence of the condition. An explanation should be in writing.
So does this mean that headaches can only be rated under Chapter 18 up to 3% as a stand-alone rating in the
absence of any other ratable impairment from Chapters 2 through 17? We may need some judicial and appellate
court help on this. However, it appears from the language quoted above, that a physician can rate headaches up to
3% WPI if there is medical justification for it and the physician provides a detailed explanation of how and why
headaches should be rated in a given case. It appears reasonable that a rating for headaches can be combined
with any other ratable impairment or as a stand-alone rating even though there is no other medical condition that is
ratable from the AMA Guides from another chapter arising from the same injury or illness. The key is having the
treating or examining physician justify his or her conclusions about rating headaches within either context.
But since the authors of Chapter 18 wrote this in 2000, has science improved to the point that some headaches are
ratable in other chapters of the AMA Guides? In order to determine whether any headaches can be rated outside
Chapter 18, you must look at the current science and medicine behind headaches.
Current medical research and clinical practice identifies primary headache disorders and secondary headache
disorders. Patients with recurrent, episodic headaches have a primary headache disorder in the absence of any
verifiable structural abnormality. These include migraines, cluster headaches, tension-type headaches and two
other rarer types involving half of the cranium. All primary headaches are either episodic or chronic. Most people
Page 2 of 3
§ 4.29 Headaches
who suffer from primary headache disorders have recurrent episodic, severe headaches with onset during
adolescence or early adulthood.
Secondary headaches occur as “new” or sudden onset headaches and are associated with intra-cranial, extra-
cranial or systemic medical conditions. These include anything from brain tumors to vascular disorders and
hypertension. Of note to us in our workers’ compensation cases is the fact that many secondary headaches are
caused by analgesic rebound, i.e., when opiate based medications wear off for someone who is dependent or
addicted to them, caffeine withdrawal and some medications for GERD such as proton pump inhibitors.
Anyone who has severe onset of a headache with associated confusion, seizure, fever or obvious specific
neurological signs have a medical emergency and must see a physician immediately. For alarming cases,
especially someone who is over 50 years of age, the standard is to do an MRI brain scan with contrast,
angiography or venography, rather than a CT scan because MRI scans visualize most vascular and other structural
abnormalities better than a CT scan does.
People who have cluster headaches are generally men between the ages of 20 and 40 years and have severe
headaches greater than 1 per day for 1–3 months usually at the same time each day lasting from 30–60 minutes.
About .4% of the U.S. population suffers from cluster headaches, which are treated with standard medications for
prevention, and acute episodes and can go into remission for months at a time.
Migraine headaches are a primary headache disorder that affects about 18% of women and 6% of men in the U.S.
They also begin in late adolescence or early adulthood, diminish after age 50 and probably run in families. Pain can
be severe, lasting between 4–72 hours and associated with autonomic symptoms such as nausea, sensitivity to
light, noise or odors. People who suffer migraines like to lay down in a dark, quiet place to allow the headache to
run its course. There is significant objective evidence when a person suffers a migraine because there is
involvement of the neurovascular system with altered central neuronal processing and inflammation in cranial blood
vessels in the trigeminal-vascular system.
The following are known to trigger migraine headaches: drinking red wine, skipping meals, flashing lights or strong
odors, weather changes, sleep deprivation, stress, hormonal factors, head injuries, neck pain, TMJ disorders, and
fluctuating estrogen levels (migraines go into remission during pregnancy). Some people who suffer from migraine
headaches have severe attacks that can be incapacitating and disruptive to family life and work. However, the
physical examination by a physician including neurological testing is normal.
Treatment for migraine headaches depend upon the frequency, intensity and duration of attacks. Patients are
educated in discovering and avoiding triggers of migraine headaches. Behavioral interventions such as
biofeedback, stress management and psychotherapy are used when stress is a major trigger or when analgesics
are being overused. The standard medication for migraine headaches are called “triptans”, such as Imitrex®, and
there are at least seven different types of triptans on the market. Most physicians also prescribe amitrityline
(Elavil®), beta-blockers and other widely used medications, including Botox injections into the scalp to reduce acute
pain.
If there is any objective evidence that a person has headaches from a seizure disorder, head injury, medication side
effects or structural damage to the nerves or vascular system, then the headaches may be part of a ratable and
measurable impairment under other chapters of the AMA Guides besides Chapter 18, Pain. The key is that there
has to be objective findings from diagnostic imaging studies, nerve studies and a neurological physical examination
and neuropsychological testing that are required under the AMA Guides, Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral
Nervous System. Most importantly, there has to be evidence that the headache condition is permanent. Otherwise,
the headache complaints are based solely on subjective complaints by the headache sufferer and there is no
objective evidence that they exist, let alone permanently.
In the AMA Guides, Section 13.3b on page 311 and Table 13-3 covers impairments caused by paroximal
(unpredictable episodic occurrences) disorders that result in episodic loss of consciousness or awareness. All you
have to do is ask someone who has a full blown cluster or migraine headache whether he or she is functional
during an episode and you will know that these types of headaches should be ratable under Chapter 13 of the AMA
Page 3 of 3
§ 4.29 Headaches
Guides. If that person clinically has objective evidence of the underlying headache syndrome, then a rating under
Table 13-2 on page 309, Impairment of Consciousness and Awareness, or a seizure disorder rating under Table
13-3 on page 312 is appropriate directly or by analogy. Notice the examples that adjoin these Tables require
objective evidence of the underlying symptoms.
In addition, in Chapter 11 of the AMA Guides, Section 11.2b on page 252 covers disturbances of vestibular function
(balance and equilibrium) that cause symptoms of vertigo (dizziness), including “various degrees of nausea,
vomiting, headache, immobility, ataxia and nystagmus.” Again, like in Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides, there has to
be objective evidence of the underlying vestibular disturbance that is permanent and a rating can be obtained under
Table 11-4 on page 253, “Impairment Due to Vestibular Disorders.”
The essential bottom line for headaches to be ratable under these chapters of the AMA Guides is that the
headaches have to be permanent and caused by an underlying medical condition that is objectively measurable.
The most common cases we see where headaches are ratable under these chapters are serious head injuries,
strokes and other organic brain disorders.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 4.30
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 4
Substantial Medical Evidence and Establishing the Most Accurate WPI Ratings
§ 4.30 The Cannon Case: Permanent Objective Medical Diagnosis
Throughout the years, since the enactment of SB 899, all of the guidebooks have directed physicians and attorneys
to focus on permanent objective medical conditions in order to determine whether that condition is ratable under the
AMA Guides. Some people interpret the AMA Guides to stand for the proposition that if a medical condition does
not have permanent objective medical findings, then it cannot be rated at all. It took only 10 years for the appellate
courts to tell us that this proposition is wrong. In January 2014, the Court of Appeal, Third Appellate District, issued
its published decision in City of Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) [(2013) 222 Cal. App. 4th
1360, 167 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1] indicating two important points that apply in our cases.
The first point from the court in Cannon is that permanent objective medical findings such as seen on an MRI, CT,
X-ray scans or other diagnostic studies are not necessarily required in order to provide a WPI rating for a medical
condition under the AMA Guides. The second point is that using an alternative rating method to calculate a WPI
rating in a given case is not limited to cases that are complex or extraordinary [see City of Sacramento v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013) 222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 1366–1372, 167 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp.
Cases 1].
In Cannon, a police officer complained of pain to his left heel and foot, especially with weight-bearing activities
including running. He reported his condition and saw a physician. The physical exam revealed some slight
tenderness around the officer’s heel, and the primary treating physician diagnosed mild plantar fasciitis. An AME,
who was utilized in the case, wrote in his report after finding the officer MMI that he was “unable to offer any
impairment from a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides 5th Edition” because “other than some tenderness, no
objective abnormalities were identifiable” [see City of Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013)
222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 1364–1365, 167 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
The AME also wrote in pertinent part: “[H]eel pain, or for that matter, other aspects of pain that do not have any
accompanying objective measurement abnormalities, do not rate anything in the AMA Guides, whether or not these
problems interfere with one’s activities.” However, the physician concluded that the officer was precluded from such
things as prolonged running [see City of Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013) 222 Cal.
App. 4th 1360, 1365, 167 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
Not happy with the AME’s 0% WPI rating, the officer’s attorney wrote a letter to the doctor strongly suggesting that
this case should be rated for permanent impairment. The doctor then wrote a supplemental report that said this
case is ratable “using a gait derangement abnormality” based on AMA Guides Table 17-5, page 529 because the
officer’s condition is analogous to having “a limp, despite the absence of any arthritic changes about adjacent joints,
equivalent to a 7% whole person impairment” [see City of Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon)
(2013) 222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 1365, 167 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
Can a primary treating or evaluating physician assign a WPI rating in a case that has no permanent objective
findings and the medical condition is not listed in the AMA Guides 5th Edition? Since plantar fasciitis is not a listed
medical condition in the AMA Guides, was the physician’s rating in Cannon proper and did it constitute substantial
evidence? Is it proper to rate this case based on the principles enunciated by the Sixth DCA in Almaraz-Guzman III
[see Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837]? Is this a “complex and extraordinary case”?
Page 2 of 4
§ 4.30 The Cannon Case: Permanent Objective Medical Diagnosis
The court in Cannon said: “There is nothing in the 2004 amendment to section 4660 that precludes a finding of
impairment based on subjective complaints of pain where no objective abnormalities are found” [see City of
Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013) 222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 1371, 167 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 79
Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
The court quoted and reiterated the Sixth DCA in Almaraz-Guzman III that Labor Code § 4660 does not require
strict compliance with or mechanical application of the AMA Guides, and the key in every case is for a treating or
evaluating physician to find the most accurate WPI rating within the four corners of the AMA Guides 5th Edition [see
City of Sacramento v. Workers' Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013) 222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 1368, 167 Cal. Rptr.
3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
On the issue of whether the principles in Almaraz-Guzman III apply only in complex and extraordinary cases, the
court in Cannon said that the Sixth DCA was “using the term ‘complex or extraordinary cases’ to describe
‘syndromes that are ‘poorly understood and are manifested only by subjective symptoms” which the AMA Guides
do not, and cannot, rate” [see City of Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013) 222 Cal. App.
4th 1360, 1372, 167 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
A case does not have to be “complex” or “extraordinary” for Almaraz-Guzman III to apply—the physician must find
the most accurate WPI rating based on his or her clinical judgment, expertise, knowledge, skill and education [see
City of Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013) 222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 1372, 167 Cal. Rptr.
3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
It is about “accuracy” and not about how complex or extraordinary a case may be. Plantar fasciitis, as Cannon’s
condition, “appears to fall right into the category of cases the Sixth District was describing in Milpitas Unified, where
the AMA Guides ‘calls for the physician’s exercise of clinical judgment to assess the impairment most accurately’ ”
[see City of Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013) 222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 1372, 167 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
The court in Cannon then says: “Dr. Ramsey performed that assessment here and determined that Cannon’s
plantar fasciitis resulted in a 7 percent whole person impairment equivalent to a limp with arthritis” [see City of
Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013) 222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 1372, 167 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 79
Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
COMMENTARY:
The Cannon case creates a new method of rating medical conditions that are not listed in the AMA Guides
by way of an “Objective Medical Diagnosis”, which is not the same thing as a permanent objective medical
finding. An “Objective Medical Diagnosis” is a medical condition that has consistent and identifiable signs,
symptoms, and complaints and has nationally accepted diagnostic criteria but by definition does not have
any permanent objective medical findings such as from diagnostic imaging studies or other objective testing
methods. Examples of these accepted medical conditions include but are not limited to:
• Plantar fasciitis
• Fibromyalgia
• Epicondylitis (not operated)
• Costrochondritis
• Headaches
• Iliotibial band tendonitis
• Trochanteric bursitis
• Recurrent DRE I lumbar, thoracic, or cervical spine “sprain”
Page 3 of 4
§ 4.30 The Cannon Case: Permanent Objective Medical Diagnosis
• Chronic pain syndromes with the absence of tissue damage
Also, you must remember that the court in Almaraz-Guzman III specifically pointed out that diagnostic
criteria for medical conditions have changed since 2000 when the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides was first
published. In fact, the diagnostic criteria for complex regional pain syndrome changed in 2006 by the
International Association of the Study of Pain, as pointed out elsewhere in this guidebook [see Ch. 3, § 3.13
(Chronic Pain Syndrome) of this handbook]. The court in Almaraz-Guzman III allows for contemporary
diagnostic criteria to be used and then the treating or evaluating physician must use the four corners of the
AMA Guides to determine the most accurate WPI rating.
The court in Cannon has created a step-by-step analysis by physicians and attorneys to determine proper
application of the principles enunciated by the Sixth DCA in Almaraz-Guzman III to include:
1. What are the permanent objective medical findings? This is based on diagnostic tests, findings on
exam such as ROM, muscle weakness, operative reports.
2. What is the strict WPI rating?
3. State whether the strict rating accurately reflects the IW’s disability with respect to ADL functioning
(Table 1-2).
4. If the WPI strict rating is not accurate, state why it is not accurate.
5. If there is no strict WPI rating, the physician must say so and why (e.g., The medical condition is not
mentioned in the Guides; there are no permanent objective medical findings that accompanies the
diagnosis).
6. If there is an objective medical diagnosis but it is not listed in the Guides, what is the diagnosis and is
it recognized in the medical community as a legitimate medical condition with nationally recognized
standards of diagnostic criteria?
7. For either inaccurate strict WPI ratings or for objective medical diagnoses, the physician then can
describe an analogous WPI rating using any chapter, table, or method listed in the AMA Guides 5th
Edition (functional loss, anatomic or diagnosis based).
8. The physician then explains the rationale for the doctor’s conclusions.
9. Are the physician’s conclusions based on reasonable medical probability?
The court in Cannon quoted the AMA Guides, which mandates that a physician evaluate the effect of a
medical condition on the person’s functioning: “The physician’s role in performing an impairment evaluation
is to provide an independent, unbiased assessment of the individual’s medical condition, including its effect
on function, and identify abilities and limitations to performing activities of daily living …” [see City of
Sacramento v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cannon) (2013) 222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 1369, 167 Cal. Rptr.
3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1].
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
Page 4 of 4
§ 4.30 The Cannon Case: Permanent Objective Medical Diagnosis
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp CHAPTER 5.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 5
Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
CHAPTER 5 Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
§ 5.01  Introduction
[1]  Overview of SB 863; Injuries Occurring On or After 1/1/2013
[2]  What Has Not Changed for Dates of Injury On or After 1/1/2013
[3]  Permanent Disability Ratings for Dates of Injury On or After 1/1/2013
[a]  Elimination of DFEC Adjustment Factor
[b]  Elimination of Sleep Disorders, Sexual Dysfunction and Psychiatric Impairments That Result
From Physical Injuries
[c]  Exception: Psychiatric Injury That Is From Violent Act or Catastrophic Injury
[d]  Pain Related Add-On for Sleep Disorders and Sexual Dysfunction
[4]  Adjustments for Occupation and Age
[5]  Rebuttal of a WPI Rating
[6]  Ogilvie Rebuttal for Injuries On or After 1/1/2013
[7]  Payments of Permanent Disability
[8]  No Change in Number of Weeks of Payments of Permanent Disability
[9]  The 15% Bump-Up and Bump-Down
[10]  Supplemental Job Displacement Benefits
[11]  “Return to Work” Fund
[a]  Background and Purpose
[b]  2013 RAND Study of Permanent Disability to Disproportional Wage Loss
[i]  Working Paper
[ii]  Research Challenges
[iii]  Post-Injury Earnings
Page 2 of 2
Synopsis to CHAPTER 5 : Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
[iv]  Post Injury Time Period and Supplemental Job Displacement Benefits
[v]  Study Methods
[vi]  Preliminary Findings
[vii]  Determination of Eligibility for RTWF Supplemental Payments
[viii]  Appeals of DIR Determinations on Eligibility
[ix]  Other Issues to Resolve
[12]  How to Do Ratings Under 2005 and 2013 PDRS
§ 5.02  Example 1: More Than One Body Part Injured in One Injury
§ 5.03  Example 2: Upper Extremity Injury and Its Sub-Regions
§ 5.04  Example 3: More Than One Body Part Injured in More Than One Injury
§ 5.05  Example 4: Failed Back Case With Psychiatric and Pain Sequelae
§ 5.06  Example 5: Voice/Speech Impairment
§ 5.07  Example 6: Recurrent Disc Herniation
§ 5.08  Example 7: Multiple Upper Extremity Injuries
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 5.01
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 5
Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
§ 5.01 Introduction
[1] Overview of SB 863; Injuries Occurring On or After 1/1/2013
This chapter will focus on how to calculate a permanent disability rating under both the 2005 PDRS and the
2013 PDRS pursuant to the provisions of Labor Code § 4660.1 for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013.
Senate Bill 863 was signed into law by then Governor Edmund Brown on September 18, 2012. SB 863 has
been in effect for 10 years with no significant reform in California workers’ compensation law since then except
for some statutory presumptions involving safety members and COVID-19 infections.
In addition to learning the method of calculating permanent disability ratings, we will provide a complete
discussion of how dates of injury on or after January 1, 2013 affect permanent disability and other benefits that
are based on a permanent disability rating, such as supplemental job displacement benefits, the “bump-up” or
“bump down” of weekly benefits under Labor Code § 4658, and the “Return to Work” benefits under Labor Code
§ 139.48 where an injured worker’s permanent disability rating is disproportional to his or her loss of future
earnings.
Finally, we will provide examples of actual cases where permanent disability ratings are calculated under both
the 2005 PDRS and the 2013 PDRS as if the injuries occurred on or after 1/1/2013.
[2] What Has Not Changed for Dates of Injury On or After 1/1/2013
• Life pensions, COLAs [Lab. Code § 4659]. However, the beginning amounts of payment for each
percentage of permanent disability at or over 70% is higher for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013.
• The threshold of proof for specific injuries, cumulative trauma injuries, and compensable consequential
injuries (except sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction and certain psychiatric claims that occur from a
physical injury, as described below).
• Disputes over parts of body injured, so if a right knee is an admitted part of body injured, the parties can
still dispute the left knee, low back, etc. with the proper dispute resolution process intact.
• Law of apportionment of permanent disability per Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664, so defendants will
continue to raise these issues in every case as appropriate.
• Labor Code § 4662cases where there is a presumption of permanent total disability either based on a
listed type of condition or based on the fact.
• How whole person impairment is determined (except for sleep, sex and psyche from a physical injury). We
will continue to use the AMA Guides 5th Edition to determine WPI ratings.
• WPI is still determined by treating, PQME and AME physicians. The injured worker can still obtain
consultations or have an attending physician outside an MPN but an award of compensation cannot be
solely based on a non-MPN physician’s opinion unless a PQME or AME reviews and agrees with the
non-MPN physician’s assessment [see Lab. Code § 4605].
• The way we develop the record leading to settlement or trial is the same, including allowing us to utilize an
AME “at any time,” implying that if a panel QME’s conclusions do not constitute substantial evidence,
we can then agree to an AME on specific issues or on the entire case [see Lab. Code § 4062.2(f)].
Page 2 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
[3] Permanent Disability Ratings for Dates of Injury On or After 1/1/2013
[a] Elimination of DFEC Adjustment Factor
In new Labor Code § 4660.1, the law eliminates the DFEC adjustment factor for diminished future earning
capacity and substitutes a uniform “adjustment factor” of 1.4 that is multiplied times the WPI to obtain a
“standard permanent disability rating” that is then adjusted for the injured worker’s occupation and age at
the time of injury. In section 4660.1(a), the term “permanent disability” is not defined at all. There is no
reference to “diminished future earning capacity” caused by “the nature of a physical injury or
disfigurement.”
As part of the WPI rating, section 4006.1(b) mandates that each WPI rating is multiplied by an “adjustment
factor” of 1.4, which means that each WPI rating is increased by 40% before adjustment for occupation and
age. This is a very significant aspect of SB 863 because this section eliminates all DFEC adjustment factors
and adopts essentially a “DFEC Rank 8” increase from the 2005 PDRS for all parts of body injured. A
DFEC Rank 8 in the 2005 PDRS mandates a 40% increase of a WPI rating for things like a psychiatric
impairment or hearing loss.
For injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, every part of body injured gets a “DFEC Rank 8” adjustment
factor of 40% even though “diminished future earning capacity” is no longer a factor in the rating of
permanent disability.
Under the 2005 PDRS, an injury to the knee prior to 1/1/2013 would have a DFEC adjustment factor of
Rank 2, which would be an increase of a WPI rating by 14%. The same WPI rating for a knee injury
occurring on or after 1/1/2013 would be increased by 40% instead.
[b] Elimination of Sleep Disorders, Sexual Dysfunction and Psychiatric Impairments That Result
From Physical Injuries
New Labor Code §§ 4660.1(c)(1) and (2) is a response to the excessive claims for these conditions in
almost every case brought by some law firms. Isolated from the other provisions of section 4660.1, you can
see the controversy as the new statute stands alone:
(c)
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), there shall be no increases in impairment ratings for sleep
dysfunction, sexual dysfunction, or psychiatric disorder, or any combination thereof, arising out
of a compensable physical injury. Nothing in this section shall limit the ability of an injured
employee to obtain treatment for sleep dysfunction, sexual dysfunction, or psychiatric disorder,
if any, that are a consequence of an industrial injury.
(2) An increased impairment rating for psychiatric disorder shall not be subject to paragraph (1) if
the compensable psychiatric injury resulted from either of the following:
(A) Being a victim of a violent act or direct exposure to a significant violent act within the
meaning of Section 3208.3.
(B) A catastrophic injury, including, but not limited to, loss of a limb, paralysis, severe burn, or
severe head injury.
So an injured worker who suffers from a sleep disorder, sexual dysfunction and psychiatric disorder that is
a compensable consequence of a physical injury cannot receive any “increases in impairment ratings.” But
he or she can receive treatment for them on an industrial basis, subject to utilization review, independent
medical review and through a medical provider network physician.
[c] Exception: Psychiatric Injury That Is From Violent Act or Catastrophic Injury
The legislature created an exception and allows for an increase in impairment ratings from a psychiatric
disorder caused by a physical injury if the injury itself was from a violent act, direct exposure to a significant
Page 3 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
violent act under Labor Code § 3208.3 or there is a “catastrophic injury, including, but not limited to, loss of
a limb, paralysis, severe burn, or severe head injury.”
There is no limitation other than what is listed in Labor Code § 3208.3 on psychiatric claims that are not the
compensable consequences of a physical injury but are a “stand-alone” psyche injury. We anticipate a lot of
litigation on the issue of whether a psyche claim is a stand-alone claim or is limited under Labor Code
§ 4660.1(c) as a compensable consequence of a physical injury and is not an exception listed under that
section. Many attorneys will file a cumulative trauma psyche claim in order to get around the limitation of
section 4660.1(c) in cases where in fact a psychiatric condition is caused by a physical injury that is not a
“catastrophic injury.” Case law will develop to illuminate the line between a compensable psyche case and
one that is compensable but cannot have impairment added to or combined with another WPI rating when
that rating is from a physical injury.
There is no definition of what constitutes a “catastrophic injury” in the statute. In some ways, this is good
and will allow the individualization of a WPI rating to include a psychiatric impairment from a physical injury
that is “catastrophic” to an injured worker on a case-by-case basis. The issue here is whether the term
refers to the underlying injury itself or the consequences of an injury. The examples given in the Labor
Code—“including but not limited to, loss of a limb, paralysis, severe burn, or severe head injury”—refer to
the actual immediate effect of an injury and not the consequences of one, such as if treatment for an injury
fails and the injured worker has a “catastrophic” result. Would the WCAB consider Ms. Guzman’s case
“catastrophic” given that her bilateral carpal tunnel surgeries failed and she had to retire as a school
secretary? We will see how the courts interpret the language of section 4660.1(c).
The definition of “catastrophic injury” ranges from an injury that results in permanent impairment of function
to “any misfortune, mishap or failure, an unfortunate final event or conclusion; a calamity” [see Webster’s
Unabridged Dictionary, 2nd Ed. 1998, page 326] to “consequences of an injury that permanently prevents
an individual from performing any gainful work” [see 42 U.S.C.S. § 3796b (federal public safety officers
such as police and fire protection personnel)].
In the 2019 edition of this guidebook, a discussion about what constitutes a “catastrophic injury” includes
the following:
In practice, a “catastrophic injury” will probably have to pass a “smell test” by the WCAB in every case
where a psychiatric claim is made as a compensable consequence of a physical injury. We think you have
to develop the record with the primary treating physician who knows the injured worker and his or her
reaction to a physical injury—how serious the injury was and how it has affected that person’s ADL
functioning and lifestyle. If the physician’s opinion is that the physical injury was “catastrophic” to the injured
worker, then you have medical evidence that the psychiatric disorder is probably ratable.
Does a chronic pain syndrome constitute a “catastrophic injury?” It will depend on how the WCAB and
appellate courts construe the new language of section 4660.1(c)(1) and (2). Many times we see a typical
injury that results in “routine” surgery, then turns into a train wreck with severe and debilitating
consequences, including psychiatric ones. It remains to be seen whether or not the intent of the legislature
was to eliminate these types of cases along with those that should never have had a psyche disorder
alleged in the first place.
On May 10, 2019, the WCAB issued its en banc decision in Wilson v. State of California; Cal. Fire [(2019)
84 Cal. Comp. Cases 393 (Appeals Board en banc)]. The WCAB has finally spoken and addressed the
issue of what constitutes a catastrophic injury pursuant to Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(2)(B). The Board has
decided that a catastrophic injury can refer to either the mechanism of the injury itself or the consequences
of an industrial injury. Either way, this is a fact driven inquiry into whether an injury is catastrophic and the
injured worker can receive permanent disability for the psychiatric sequelae of a physical injury when the
date of injury is on or after 1/1/13.
The Applicant was a firefighter who on May 13, 2014, reported to a wild fire where he inhaled fumes and
smoke from the fire and was not wearing breathing apparatus. He claimed injuries to his lungs, heart,
circulatory system, psyche, left eye, head and brain. Defendants accepted liability for everything except the
heart and circulatory system. He was hospitalized in serious condition that included being in an ICU and
Page 4 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
intubated. He had at some points in time renal and respiratory failure with a stormy hospital course until he
was extubated on May 29, 2014. He was discharged from the hospital on June 1, 2014.
The diagnosis from a panel QME in internal medicine revealed the Applicant had hypersensitivity
pneumonitis with respiratory failure, generalized papular eruptions resolved, pulmonary hypertension,
allergic diathesis, toxic metabolic encephalopathy with cognitive impairment (per another PQME in
neurology). A psychological QME diagnosed the Applicant with post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and a
sleep disorder. The psyche QME indicated a GAF of 47 which is a 36% WPI with 90% due to the actual
event of employment—the fire—and 10% to being forced to retire as a firefighter. The panel QME in psyche
opined as follows:
… while the primary injury, a Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, arose out of the effects of and treatment
for a compensable physical injury, it is my opinion that it is not precluded from compensability for
disability by Labor Code Section 4660.1 pursuant to SB863 for dates of injury effective January 1,
2013; because in my opinion, the industrial psychological injury represents a catastrophic injury.
The matter went to trial and the trial judge excluded from his or her rating instructions to the DEU any
consideration for a permanent disability rating for psyche. The judge awarded a 66% permanent disability
after apportionment. The Applicant filed a Petition for Reconsideration, contending that the trial judge
should have included a permanent disability rating for the psychological aspects of the case. The WCAB en
banc decision reversed the trial judge and found that the Applicant’s injuries were catastrophic in
accordance with Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(2)(B).
The Appeals Board discussed the history of Labor Code § 3208.3 since the Green-Margolin Act of 1989.
The takeaway of this discussion is that limitations were placed by the legislature over the years to limit
compensability of psychiatric claims. The Board discusses the difference between a direct injury as
opposed to a compensable consequential injury, that in any event an injury must be proximately caused by
the employment in order to be compensable, citing Labor Code § 3600(a)(3). There is a very interesting
discussion on 84 Cal. Comp. Cases at 404 that gives some examples of compensable consequential
injuries that are far afield from the original work injury. The Board then concludes that the Applicant’s
injuries as a firefighter did not fall under the exception of being a victim of a violent act or direct exposure to
a significant violent act as indicated in Labor Code § 4660.1(c(2)(A).
The Appeals Board has provided the workers’ compensation community with guidelines as to what
constitutes a catastrophic injury that entitles an injured worker to obtain permanent disability benefits for a
psyche injury that is caused by a physical industrial injury. The Board indicates that the determination of
whether an injury is a “catastrophic injury” under Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(2)(B) focuses on the nature of the
injury and is a fact-driven inquiry.
The Appeals Board indicates that the first level of analysis for compensability for psychiatric permanent
disability is to follow the Rolda analysis [see Rolda v. Pitney Bowes, Inc. (2001) 66 Cal. Comp. Cases 241,
245 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]. This also includes the separate analysis of whether or not the
psychiatric disability was substantially caused (35 to 40 percent) by a violent act, in which case, if it was,
then there is no need to determine if the injury was catastrophic.
The Appeals Board provides the fact-driven guidelines for triers of fact to determine whether or not an injury
is catastrophic and indicates those guidelines include but are not limited to:
1. The intensity and seriousness of treatment received by the employee that was reasonably required
to cure or relieve from the effects of the injury.
2. The ultimate outcome when the employee’s physical injury is permanent and stationary.
3. The severity of the physical injury and its impact on the employee’s ability to perform activities of
daily living (ADLs) referencing Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA Guides [and listed in this
guidebook in Ch. 3, § 3.02].
4. Whether the physical injury is closely analogous to one of the injuries specified in the statute: loss a
limb, paralysis, severe burn, or severe head injury.
5. If the physical injury is an incurable and progressive disease
Page 5 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
The WCAB remanded the case back to the trial level for determination by the trial judge about
compensability of the Applicant’s claim of injuries to his heart and to apply permanent disability for the
psyche. The Appeals Board made a specific finding:
Applicant sustained a catastrophic injury pursuant to section 4660.1(C)(2)(B) and may receive an
increased impairment rating for his psychiatric injury.
In light of this wording from the WCAB en banc decision, trial judges are advised to use this language in
Findings and Awards where there is a specific finding (or not) that an injury is found to be “catastrophic.”
The fact-driven rule applies both to the question of whether the injury itself is catastrophic (such as a severe
burn as indicated as an example in the statute) or the injury’s permanent effect on the injured worker.
Remember the language in the case at 84 Cal. Comp. Cases at 414: “If the psychiatric injury is a
compensable consequence of the physical injury, the statute’s language reflects that the psychiatric injury
must result from a catastrophic injury on order for the employee to receive an increased rating for the
psychiatric injury. This indicates that the inquiry into whether an injury is catastrophic is limited to looking
solely at the physical injury, without consideration for the psychiatric injury in evaluating the nature of the
injury. The injury must therefore be deemed catastrophic independent of the psychiatric injury.”
The Board also reminded us that this rubric does not apply in cases where a psychiatric injury is directly
related to industrial exposure and is not a result of a physical injury. Also, this analysis for a catastrophic
injury does not apply in cases where the psychiatric injury is caused by a violent act. In all psychiatric
cases, however, a Rolda analysis must occur and be part of the record.
[d] Pain Related Add-On for Sleep Disorders and Sexual Dysfunction
Can an injured worker obtain pain related impairment up to 3% WPI under page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS
and ADL functioning in Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA Guides based on a sleep disorder and/or sexual
dysfunction? Table 1-2 refers to “orgasm, ejaculation, lubrication, erection” for sexual function, and to
“restful, nocturnal sleep pattern for sleep”, as activities of daily living (ADLs). It appears to us that Labor
Code § 4660.1(c) precludes any WPI rating for sleep disorder and sexual dysfunction whether from a stand-
alone WPI rating or from a pain related impairment—there appears to be no exception given in the
legislation.
However, Labor Code § 4660.1(c) does require the employer to provide treatment on an industrial basis for
sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction and psychiatric disorders if these are compensable consequences of a
physical injury; you just cannot add on any WPI ratings for them.
[4] Adjustments for Occupation and Age
New Labor Code § 4660.1 mandates that the WPI be modified by the adjustment factor of 1.4 and then
adjusted for the occupation and age of the injured worker at the time of his or her injury.
Section 4660.1(d) provides that the Administrative Director may create a new 2013 PDRS that incorporates age
and occupational modifiers for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013. It also mandates use of the age and
occupational modifiers from the 2005 PDRS in the meantime. But the new section does not give any selection
criteria for how age and occupational modifiers are to be determined. There is no reference to “empirical data”
of which the prior 2005 PDRS was so fond of referring. It will be interesting to see the process by which any
new modifiers are created. Remember, Labor Code § 4660 originally mandated that the 2005 PDRS be
updated “at least every five years” based on empirical data. This never occurred. In contrast, the legislature has
given the Administrative Director discretion to update the occupation and age modifiers but he or she is not
required to do so. If there are any new occupation or age modifiers, section 4660.1 requires that they be
uniform, objective and consistent.
There has been an argument, for example, that the age modifiers should be reversed—the younger injured
workers should receive more money than older workers because of loss of future earning capacity is greater
and longer in time for a young disabled worker than for an older one. The counter argument is that the older
worker loses more earnings since workers who are in their 40s and 50s earn the highest income during those
years compared to younger earners in the same or similar jobs. There is also an argument that older workers
Page 6 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
take longer to recover from an injury than a younger injured worker, so permanent disability benefits should be
paid longer in time for older workers than for younger ones.
There also was never a clear description by the DEU or the DWC on how occupational variants were developed
in any of the prior permanent disability rating schedules. Hopefully, the current Administrative Director has
access to accurate and reliable data to base permanent disability adjustments for occupation (and perhaps
age) on some kind of rubric that is supported and logical. A farm laborer with a bad back should fare better than
a bank president with the same bad back, but the current 2005 PDRS does not seem to account adequately for
this type of disparity in rating adjustment for occupation. This is a great opportunity to update age and
occupational variants based on some kind of research that is valid, consistent, objective, and reliable. Section
4660.1(e) allows the Administrative Director to update these modifiers, but the statute does not mandate it.
[5] Rebuttal of a WPI Rating
Can a party still rebut a WPI rating? Section 4660.1(d) states that the 2013 PDRS applies when it is adopted by
the Administrative Director and is applicable in cases “without formal introduction in evidence, shall be prima
facie evidence of the percentage of permanent disability to be attributed to each injury covered by the
schedule.” Attorneys were concerned that the legislature would someday adopt a PDRS that mandated a
conclusive presumption of correctness of a permanent disability rating. That fortunately did not occur and it
appears that the legislature still believes each injured worker is unique and is entitled to an individualized
permanent disability rating that can be rebutted by substantial evidence.
Section 4660.1(g) and (h) preserve the right to rebut a WPI rating or to go outside the AMA Guides if a
presumption of permanent total disability exists:
(g) Nothing in this section shall preclude a finding of permanent total disability in accordance with Section
4662.
(h) In enacting the act adding this section, it is not the intent of the Legislature to overrule the holding in
Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th
808.
Counsel is reminded that under the Guzman case, the following steps have to be taken by a treating physician
or medical-legal evaluator to properly rebut a strict WPI rating:
1. What is the strict rating from the AMA Guides 5th Edition?
2. Is the strict rating an accurate description of the IW’s impairment and disability?
3. If not, why is the strict rating inaccurate?
4. What is the alternative rating under the AMA Guides 5th Edition?
5. Why is the alternative rating more accurate than the strict rating?
6. Are the physician’s conclusions based on reasonable medical probability?
7. Approximately what percentage of permanent disability is due to the industrial injury(ies) and what
percentage is due to other factors?
As you can see, the legislature specifically allows counsel to seek permanent and total disability under Labor
Code § 4662 just like we do under the 2005 PDRS, which takes the case out of the AMA Guides in most 100%
permanent and total disability presumption cases. In addition, a strict WPI rating is still subject to alternative
rating methods consistent with the case law that developed from Almaraz-Guzman II.
In September 2018, the District Court of Appeal, Third Appellate District, issued its published decision in
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Fitzpatrick) [(2018) 27 Cal. App.
5th 607, 83 Cal. Comp. Cases 1680]. The Applicant was a correctional officer who developed a cumulative
trauma injury to his heart and psyche. The parties utilized medical evaluators in internal medicine and
psychiatry. The internal medicine physician concluded that the Applicant has a cardiac whole person
impairment of 75% WPI, which, after adjustment for age and occupation, rated 97% permanent disability. The
psychiatrist concluded that the Applicant has a psychiatric impairment rating of 40% WPI which rates out to a
Page 7 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
71% permanent disability. The Combined Values Chart combined the 97% and 71% to a 99% permanent
partial disability rating. The WCJ issued Findings and Award that the Applicant is 100% permanently and totally
disabled “based on the fact” pursuant to Labor Code § 4662(b). The WCJ did not discuss the rating under the
2005 PDRS and simply jumped to the conclusion that the Applicant is 100% permanently and totally disabled
based on the fact.
The employer filed a Petition for Reconsideration and the WCAB panel upheld the judge’s decision. The District
Court of Appeal in its published opinion reversed. The Court held that Labor Code § 4662(b) does not tell us
how to find permanent total disability “based on the fact.” The Court held that the proper method of doing so is
to first apply Labor Code § 4660 and apply the WPI ratings based on the medical evidence presented by the
physicians. For injuries before 1/1/13, Labor Code § 4660 expressly applies to the determination of “the
percentages of permanent disability” and Section 4660 governs how the finding and award of permanent total
disability shall be made “in accordance with the fact” as stated in Section 4662(b).
The Court pointed out, as this author does in this guidebook, that the 2005 permanent disability rating schedule
recognizes that a permanent disability rating can range from 0% to 100% permanent disability: “Zero percent
signifies no reduction of earning capacity, while 100% represents permanent total disability”, citing the 2005
PDRS, page 1-2. The Court points out that in examining the 2005 PDRS, there are many combinations of
ratings that can reach 100% permanent and total disability, citing pages 1-9 and 6-5 of the PDRS. The Court
stated: “Accordingly, by proceeding under Section 4660, Fitzpatrick would have had the opportunity to rebut the
99% scheduled disability rating to show the appropriate rating is permanent total disability.” The Court noted
that there was a vocational expert’s report in the record that was not relied upon by the trial judge or the WCAB
panel.
In short, the Court held that Section 4662(b) total disability based on the fact is not a second independent path
to permanent total disability findings separate from Section 4660. The analysis of every case is mandatory
using Section 4660. The Court of Appeal rejected the WCAB’s new argument in its brief to the Court by
suggesting the WPI ratings for the heart and psyche be added pursuant to the Kite case. The Court of Appeal is
basically saying this is not the job of the WCAB—the parties had an opportunity to develop the record.
The postscript of the Fitzpatrick case is when the case was remanded by the Court of Appeal back to the
WCAB, the parties eventually entered into a stipulation that the Applicant is 100% permanently totally disabled
on an industrial basis.
The takeaway of the Fitzpatrick case is for counsel to be mindful when the WPI ratings are high and could
reach 100% permanent and total disability “based on the fact” under Section 4662(b) that it is incumbent of
Applicant’s counsel to develop the record before trial and rebut the rating that was generated in accordance
with Labor Code § 4660. In cases like Fitzpatrick, counsel should have each physician review the other’s
reporting and comment on them. Counsel can request an opinion about whether adding the impairments would
constitute substantial evidence of a more accurate rating of permanent disability in a case and why. Fitzpatrick
was on a heart transplant list and was suffering a significant psychiatric disability. The development of the
record prior to trial in this case would have resulted in a clean rebuttal of the strict permanent disability rating of
99%.
We are seeing post-Fitzpatrick cases where the Applicant who bears the burden of proving permanent disability
has been able to rebut the strict ratings under Labor Code § 4660 by having the physicians indicate the
Combined Values Chart does not apply, the WPI ratings are additive and why, and the injured worker is
permanently totally disabled on an industrial basis after or despite apportionment. Added to that layer of rebuttal
is the appropriate vocational expert conclusions that the Applicant in a given case is not amenable to vocational
rehabilitation and why, and that he or she is precluded from any kind of work taking into account the medical
evidence and considerations of apportionment as concluded by evaluating or treating physicians.
Remember, the Fitzpatrick case involved a date of injury prior to 1/1/13. What about under the current 1.4
adjustment factor for post-1/1/13 dates of injury? While no case law is on point yet, we can assume the analysis
set forth by the Court of Appeal applies regardless of the date of injury—when the Applicant is trying to prove
permanent total disability “based on the fact” pursuant to Section 4662(b). The Applicant will have to establish
the rating for permanent disability pursuant to Labor Code § 4660.1 by utilizing the descriptions and
measurements of the AMA Guides 5th Edition as usual, and then provide a rebuttal to the permanent disability
Page 8 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
rating via vocational expert opinion, or deposition of evaluating or treating physicians to determine if WPI
ratings should be added or combined.
There are two WCAB panel decisions that support the possibility that the post 1/1/13 date of injury 1.4
adjustment factor can be rebutted just like the DFEC adjustment could be for pre-1/1/13 injuries. Just because
the eight DFEC adjustment factors for pre-1/1/13 dates of injury were replaced by the 1.4 uniform adjustment
factor does not preclude the adjustment factor, regardless of what it is in a given case, from being rebutted in
order to prove 100% permanent total disability pursuant to Labor Code § 4662(b) “based on the fact.”
Therefore, Fitzpatrick probably applies in all dates of injury post-SB 899 and post-SB 863 [see Hennessey v.
Compass Group, 2019 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 121 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision); Sandoval
v. The Conco Companies, 2019 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 299 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)].
Collie v. State of California, Employment Development Department[2023 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 3
(Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)] is a post-Fitzpatrick case panel decision addressing how a chronic
pain syndrome can be analyzed from an evidentiary standpoint to support or refute a claim of 100% total
disability.
This is a case that is worth discussing for multiple reasons. It is a post-Fitzpatrick case (date of injury March 15,
2002) that applies the principles discussed in Fitzpatrick, including the use of a vocational expert and reliable,
credible medical evidence that the applicant has a chronic pain syndrome that affects her ability to work at any
job. The trial judge’s decision was on March 16, 2022, twenty years after the date of injury, and the Appeals
Board’s decision upholding the trial judge is dated January 3, 2023!
The applicant’s permanent disability ratings under the WPI determinations of orthopedic, internal medicine, and
psychiatric AMEs came to 71%, with no valid legal apportionment. The trial judge and Appeals Board panel
disregarded apportionment found by the orthopedic AME because he failed to explain how the applicant’s
degenerative disc disease was causing part of the applicant’s permanent disability. The orthopedic injuries
were to the applicant’s low back, neck, right hip, right knee, and left shoulder. The 100% rating occurred despite
some sub rosa video evidence that was submitted to the AMEs and the trial judge. The most unusual aspect of
this case is that the trial judge, upheld by the Appeals Board panel, utilized the diagnostic criteria for a chronic
pain syndrome from the AMA Guides 6th Edition. The discussion of this case is relevant for a number of
reasons:
1. Was the judge’s and Appeals Board panel’s use of the AMA Guides 6th Edition for the diagnostic criteria
for a chronic pain syndrome proper?
2. The date of injury in this case is pre-2013, so would the result of 100% permanent total disability be the
same if the date of injury was on or after 1/1/2013?
3. Why is this case a good example of how to prosecute and prove a 100% permanent disability?
4. What could the defendant have done to avoid the 100% award with no apportionment, or is this really a
100% permanent total disability case, and, if so, why?
In this case, the WCAB upheld a WCJ’s decision that the applicant sustained a 100% permanent total disability
with no apportionment. The Appeals Board panel held that the trial judge did not err in using the definition and
six criteria of a “chronic pain syndrome” as defined in the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides. A Disability Evaluation
Unit permanent disability rating was 71% based on AME WPI ratings from the AMA Guides 5th Edition, but the
diagnosis of a chronic pain syndrome deemed the applicant to be 100% totally disabled with no apportionment.
The Appeals Board upheld the trial judge’s findings based on the medical evidence and vocational expert
conclusion that the applicant could not compete in the open labor market as a result of her industrial injuries.
Here are excerpts of the Appeals Board’s decision:
Defendant contends that the WCJ improperly applied the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides to find that
applicant has chronic pain syndrome. It is acknowledged that applicant’s permanent impairment must be
determined by use of the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides. (See Lab. Code, § 4660(b)(1).) However, there is
substantial medical evidence in the record to support the finding that applicant has chronic pain syndrome
on an industrial basis. Applicant’s PTP for several years, Dr. Grabow, outlined her pain symptoms and their
impact on her in his December 15, 2017 report. (Joint Exhibit Q, PR-2s by the PTP Dr. Grabow, December
15, 2017, exh. p. 67.) He explained that she has chronic pain syndrome as a result of her 2002 injury. (Id.)
Page 9 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
This diagnosis was also endorsed by the psychiatric AME Dr. Frank. (Joint Exhibit U, Psychiatric AME Dr.
Frank, June 21, 2018, pp. 19, 27-28.) The parties presumably choose an AME because of the AME’s
expertise and neutrality. (Power v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1986) 179 Cal.App.3d 775, 782 [51 Cal.
Comp. Cases 114].) We will follow the opinions of the AME unless good cause exists to find their opinion
unpersuasive. (Id.) Defendant makes much of the lack of a diagnosis for chronic pain syndrome by the
orthopedic AME Dr. Danzig and Dr. Danzig’s pain add-on for the lumbar spine. Dr. Danzig did not
comment in his reporting on whether applicant has this condition. A lack of this diagnosis by Dr. Danzig
does not preclude a finding that applicant has chronic pain syndrome. Defendant further contends that the
WCJ ignored her prior conclusion that applicant is not credible after review of the sub rosa videos. We
have given the WCJ’s credibility determinations great weight because the WCJ had the opportunity to
observe the demeanor of the witnesses. Applicant’s injury occurred in 2002 and may be subject to the
1997 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule (PDRS). (See Lab. Code, § 4660(d); see also Costco
Wholesale Corp. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Chavez) (2007) 151 Cal.App.4th 148, 152 [72 Cal.
Comp. Cases 582] [“when any of these three circumstances [in section 4660(d)] have occurred before
January 1, 2005, the percentage of permanent disability will be calculated using the earlier schedule that
was in effect on the date of the injury”].) However, the parties do not appear to dispute that applicant’s
injury must be rated using the 2005 PDRS and the record supports that the 2005 PDRS applies. 14
(Garza, supra, 3 Cal.3d at pp. 318-319.) The WCJ acknowledged in her Opinion on Decision that
applicant’s “testimony lacked some credibility.” (Opinion on Decision, March 16, 2022, p. 4.) However, the
WCJ also recognized that applicant confirmed that some days are better than others. (Id.) She still
maintained her conclusion that applicant suffers from a chronic pain syndrome despite her “slight credibility
issue.” There is substantial evidence in the record to support the WCJ’s finding that applicant has chronic
pain syndrome as a result of her 2002 injury.
Here is what the WCJ said in her Report and Recommendation on Defendant’s Petition for Reconsideration on
the issue of applying the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides for the finding supporting her conclusion that the
applicant has a chronic pain syndrome (emphases below by the trial judge):
Issues: 1. Injury arising out of and in the course of employment for the body part of chronic pain syndrome.
Applicant alleges the body part of chronic pain syndrome, and contends there is no rating for this
syndrome; however, applicant believes the syndrome contributes to the applicant’s allegation of total
permanent disability. Applicant also contends she requires future medical care for the chronic pain
syndrome in the form of pain medications and epidurals to the cervical and lumbar spine. The most recent
criteria for diagnosing chronic pain appear in the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides. The guidelines
state that three of these six criteria must be met in order for a health care professional to diagnose
chronic pain. Although Drs. Frank and Grabow mention the applicant’s chronic pain, they do not
perform an actual assessment as outlined by the AMA Guides, as far as the Court could discern in the
approximately 1,000 pages of records reviewed for these two physicians alone. Dr. Danzig’s opinion on
this specific issue was not sought by the parties. The Court attempted to analyze the criteria as follows:
The first criteria is the use of prescription drugs beyond the recommended duration and/or abuse
of or dependence on prescription drugs or other substances. The evidence suggests that although the
applicant is prescribed multiple medications, she is not an abuser of prescriptions medications, and
therefore does not meet this criteria.
The second criteria is excessive dependence on health care providers, spouse, or family. The
applicant’s testimony and medical records indicate a significant dependence on healthcare providers,
spouse and family. She is currently taking Gabapentin, Tramadol, WENDY COLLIE 8 ADJ2554534
Document ID: -419215720354676736 Lyrica, Midrin, Ultram, NSAID, Klonopin, Lomotil, and using adult
diapers. The applicant testified that her chronic pain creates depression, anxiety, fatigue, lack of
confidence, irritability, frustration, frequent mood changes and memory loss. She believes her chronic pain
syndrome is the reason for her anxiety and panic attacks. She testified that she is able to do some
household chores, but relies upon family and a weekly housecleaner for assistance. The applicant meets
this criteria.
The third criteria is secondary physical deconditioning due to disuse and or fear-avoidance of
physical activity due to pain. The applicant testified in relation to her gastrointestinal complications.
Page 10 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
These include diarrhea, nausea, sweating and vomiting. She can be anywhere doing anything and loses
strength and becomes very hot, has to find a toilet, sometimes instantaneously has nausea and diarrhea,
sweats profusely, and has to lie down either on the bathroom floor or if at home back to bed. She soils
herself. She wears adult diapers three times per week. The applicant meets this criteria.
The fourth criteria is withdrawal from social milieu, including work, recreation, or other social
contracts. The applicant indicates she sometimes walks with friends and goes glamping with her family.
The last glamping trip in 2018 included neck pain and the need to rest midday. There is insufficient
evidence for the Court to determine whether the applicant meets this criteria.
The fifth criteria is failure to restore pre-injury function after a period of disability, such that the
physical capacity is insufficient to pursue work, family or recreational needs. The applicant testified
that in the past she played volleyball, tennis, bike riding, hiking and camping. She no longer participates in
those activities. The applicant meets this criteria.
The sixth criteria is development of psychosocial sequelae after the initial incident, including
anxiety, fear-avoidance, depression, or nonorganic illness behaviors. The applicant testified to
symptoms of depression, episodes of anxiety, and medication prescribed for both. They are attributed to
her industrial injury. Dr. Frank, in his May 29, 2012 report, diagnosed chronic pain disorder (page 24),
relying on the applicant’s statement that she requires assistance putting on her pants and doesn’t drive for
periods longer than ten minutes. [Bold print added by this author]
The Appeals Board decision does not indicate the mechanism of injury. What started this case in the first place
that led to the 100% permanent total disability? Counsel is always advised to go back to the beginning of a
claim, especially one that has been pending since 2002, to see what the initial mechanism of injury was. In this
case, the applicant worked for the EDD as a benefits analyst who determined eligibility for unemployment
benefits. She was lifting a heavy box above her shoulder level when she suffered acute pain to her lumbar
spine. This resulted in a series of lumbar spinal surgeries that had very poor outcomes, ultimately resulting in a
chronic pain syndrome.
This author’s answers to the questions above are as follows:
1. Was the judge’s and Appeals Board panel’s use of the AMA Guides 6th Edition for the diagnostic
criteria for a chronic pain syndrome proper?
No. The source material was found by the trial judge in the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides but that citation
muddied the waters of the judge’s actual source materials. The real source is the taxonomy of chronic pain as
defined by the International Association of the Study of Pain (IASP), cited in the 6th Edition of the Guides and
discussed below.
The first part of the answer to this question is why didn’t the judge or counsel refer to the chronic pain section of
the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides? The 5th Edition of the Guides has very little discussion about the diagnostic
criteria for a chronic pain syndrome. Section 13.8 on page 343 of the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides is titled
“Criteria for Rating Impairments Related To Chronic Pain” with Table 13-22 “Criteria for Rating Impairment
Related To Chronic Pain In One Upper Extremity.” The 5th Edition states on page 343:
Impairment due primarily to intractable pain may greatly influence an individual’s ability to function.
Psychological factors can influence the degree and perception of pain: different individuals in similar
circumstances may be impaired by pain to different degrees. A chronic pain syndrome may follow thalamic
lesions, but this is rare. Chronic pain in this section covers the diagnoses of causalgia, posttraumatic
neuralgia, and reflex sympathetic dystrophy. The new term complex regional pain syndrome, type I and
type II is not used here since it does not represent a single diagnostic criterion.
…
…To rate an impairment for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and RSD in an upper extremity, use Table
13-22. If a lower extremity needs to be rated for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, or RSD, use the station
and gait impairment criteria given in Table 13-15.
Remember, the 5th Edition of the Guides was first published in November 2000 and science has advanced
since then. Perhaps this is what motivated the trial judge in Collie to check what the 6th Edition of the Guides
has to say about chronic pain syndromes. The 6th Edition was published by the AMA in 2008. In Collie, no one
physician identified a diagnosis of “causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and reflex sympathetic dystrophy.” We
Page 11 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
know now that a chronic pain syndrome can occur outside of those narrowly defined types of chronic pain. So
the trial judge in Collie searched for other source material to see what other definitions of a “chronic pain
syndrome” may exist and be more current within the medical community. Case law allows the trial judge to do
so.
In Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, at 828, 75 Cal.
Comp. Cases 837], the Court of Appeal decision indicates that a physician may use “extrinsic resources” in
determining the most accurate WPI rating for a medical condition. The court states:
At the same time, however, the WCAB majority did not explain how far the physician may go in relying on
the “four corners” when the descriptions, tables, and percentages pertaining to an injury do not accurately
describe the injured employee’s impairment. If the physician expresses the opinion that the chapter
applicable to a particular kind of injury does not describe the employee’s injury, but all other chapters
address completely different biological systems or body parts, it would likely be difficult to demonstrate that
that alternative chapter supplies substantial, relevant evidence of an alternative WPI rating. In order to
support the case for rebuttal, the physician must be permitted to explain why departure from the
impairment percentages is necessary and how he or she arrived at a different rating. That explanation
necessarily takes into account the physician’s skill, knowledge, and experience, as well as other
considerations unique to the injury at issue. In our view, a physician’s explanation of the basis for deviating
from the percentages provided in the applicable Guides chapter should not a priori be deemed insufficient
merely because his or her opinion is derived from, or at least supported by, extrinsic resources. [Italics
added by author]
One example where physicians who refer to “extrinsic resources” to derive their opinions is by applying the
newest diagnostic criteria for cardiovascular hypertensive disease, which were updated in November 2017,
despite the fact that the AMA Guides 5th Edition was published in 2000. Similarly, the DSM-5 Text Revision
was published in 2022, and the diagnostic criteria for many mental disorders were updated based on clinical
and academic research studies since 2013 when the DSM-5 was first published. Today, we have the DSM-5
Text Revised (DSM-5 TR) that was published in 2022. The DSM-IV-TR definition of a pain disorder was
embedded in a chapter called “Somatoform Disorders.” The DSM-5 and DSM-TR include a definition of
“Somatic Related Disorders.” So physicians, counsel, and judges have a variety of ways to research what the
diagnostic criteria is for chronic pain syndromes.
The WCJ’s citation to the description of a “chronic pain syndrome” in the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides was
misplaced. This was a tactical mistake made either by applicant’s counsel or the judge herself. Referring to the
6th Edition muddied the waters since the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides are not adopted in any way, shape, or
form by the legislature under Labor Code Sections 4660 and 4660.1. Arguably, the use of the 6th Edition to
determine the “definition” or diagnostic criteria for “chronic pain syndrome” can be cited under the rubric of more
modern diagnostic criteria for chronic pain than what is reflected in the 5th Edition. As discussed above in this
guidebook, Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) indicates that current
diagnostic criteria for medical conditions can be used from other sources, but the WPI ratings should be
determined using the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides since the descriptions and measurements in that edition of
the Guides were adopted by the California legislature pursuant to Labor Code Sections 4660 and 4660.1.
The trial judge and the Appeals Board panel in Collie did not cite the text of the 6th Edition of the Guides on
page 32 or check footnote 1 in the AMA Guides 6th Edition in Chapter 3. Both reference the International
Association of the Study of Pain (IASP), which among other things categorizes pain as acute (the average time
it takes to recover from tissue damage and pain subsides as the healing process occurs) to chronic pain (over
90 days with little or no subsidence of pain). The trial judge in Collie should not have cited the 6th Edition of the
AMA Guides since the direct source material for the definition of chronic pain came not from the AMA but from
the IASP.
The International Association of the Study of Pain is a non-profit organization of physicians from all over the
world in different medical specialties including pain management, neurology, psychiatry, internal medicine,
physical medicine and rehabilitation, and orthopedic surgery. The organization held a meeting in Chicago in
1995 at which time the diagnostic criteria for reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) was changed and the name of
the condition was also changed to “chronic regional pain syndrome,” which is still used today in modern
Page 12 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
medicine. The following is an excerpt from the IASP on the issue of chronic pain, which should have been
directly quoted by the trial judge in the Collie case:
International Association of the Study of Pain “Classification of Chronic Pain Second Edition (Revised)”
1994 (revised in 2020) IASP Press.
https://www.iasp-pain.org/resources/terminology/
and
https://www.iasp-pain.org/publications/free-
ebooks/classification-of-chronic-pain-second-edition-revised/
The International Association for the Study of Pain has revised the definition of pain, a standard that has
been respected globally since it was first written in 1979. “The revised definition was a true collaborative
effort, written by a multi-national, multidisciplinary task force that received input from numerous
stakeholders, including persons in pain and their caregivers,” said Srinivasa N. Raja, MD, Chair of the
IASP Task Force and Director of Pain Research, Professor of Anesthesiology & Critical Care Medicine,
Professor of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. The new definition states that pain
is: “An unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with, or resembling that associated with,
actual or potential tissue damage,” and is expanded upon by the addition of six key Notes and the
etymology of the word pain for further valuable context: • Pain is always a personal experience that is
influenced to varying degrees by biological, psychological, and social factors • Pain and nociception are
different phenomena. Pain cannot be inferred solely from activity in sensory neurons. • Through their life
experiences, individuals learn the concept of pain. • A person’s report of an experience as pain should be
respected. • Although pain usually serves an adaptive role, it may have adverse effects on function and
social and psychological well-being. • Verbal description is only one of several behaviors to express pain;
inability to communicate does not negate the possibility that a human or a nonhuman animal experiences
pain. The etymology was also included in the revised definition: Middle English, from Anglo-French peine
(pain, suffering), from Latin poena (penalty, punishment), in turn from Greek poinē (payment, penalty,
recompense). The revised definition was published in July in the association’s official journal, PAIN, along
with the associated commentary by President Lars Arendt-Nielsen and Immediate Past President, Judith
Turner. “IASP and the Task Force that wrote the revised definition and notes did so to better convey the
nuances and the complexity of pain and hoped that it would lead to improved assessment and
management of those with pain,” said Dr. Raja. “Pain is not merely a sensation, or limited to signals that
travel through the nervous system as a result of tissue damage,” he said. “With a better understanding of
an individual’s pain experience, we may be able to, through an interdisciplinary approach, add a variety of
therapies to personalize their treatment of pain,” he added.
It has been mentioned that the present volume is not a textbook. Instead it deals with syndromes of chronic
pain. Chronic pain has gradually emerged as a distinct phenomenon in comparison with acute pain. First,
studies were undertaken that explored the special features of patients with persistent pain. Later, specific
emphasis was given to the distinction between the two situations (Sternbach 1974). Chronic pain has been
recognized as that pain which persists past the normal time of healing (Bonica 1953). In practice this may
be less than one month, or more often, more than six months. With nonmalignant pain, three months is the
most convenient point of division between acute and chronic pain, but for research purposes six months
will often be preferred. Those who treat cancer pain find that three months is sometimes too long to wait
before regarding a pain as chronic. Moreover, the definition related to the time of normal healing is not
sufficient, nor is it honored consistently. Many syndromes are treated as examples of chronic pain although
normal healing has not occurred. Pain that persists for a given length of time would be a simpler concept.
This length of time is determined by common medical experience. In the first instance it is the time needed
for inflammation to subside, or for acute injuries such as lacerations or incisions to repair with the union of
separated tissues. A longer period is required if we wait for peripheral nerves to grow back after trauma. In
these circumstances, chronic pain is recognized when the process of repair is apparently ended. Some
repair, for example, the thickening of a scar in the skin and its changing color from pink (or dark) to white
(or less dark), may be painless. Other repair may never be complete; for example, neuromata in an
amputation stump constitute a permanent failure to heal that may be a site of persistent pain. Scar tissue
around a nerve may be fully healed but can still act as a persistent painful lesion.
Page 13 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
Many syndromes are treated as examples of chronic pain although it is well recognized that normal healing
has not occurred. These include rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, spinal stenosis, nerve entrapment
syndromes, and metastatic carcinoma. Others, such as persistent migraine, remit or heal and then recur.
Moreover, the increasing knowledge about plasticity of the nervous system (Wall 1989) in response to
injury indicates that CNS changes may prolong and maintain pain long after the usual time of response to
acute lesions. Such changes can make it difficult to say that normal healing has taken place. Other less
obvious failures to heal can last indefinitely (Macnab 1964, 1973); some of these lesions are not detectable
even by modern imaging techniques (Taylor and Kakulas 1991) but will still give rise to persistent chronic
pain. Chronic pain thus remains important, even if we must understand it slightly differently as a persistent
pain that is not amenable, as a rule, to treatments based upon specific remedies, or to the routine methods
of pain control such as nonnarcotic analgesics. Given that there are so many differences in what may be
regarded as chronic pain, it seems best to allow for flexibility in the comparison of cases and to relate the
issue to the diagnosis in particular situations. As it happens, the coding system has always allowed
durations to be entered as less than one month, one month to six months, and more than six months. This
is probably the best solution for the purpose of comparing data within a diagnostic category, or even
between some diagnoses…
It is common in North America to find that patients are described as having “Chronic Pain Syndrome.” In
this case the words are being used as a diagnosis that usually implies a persisting pattern of pain that may
have arisen from organic causes but which is now compounded by psychological and social problems in
behavioral changes. The Task Force was asked to adopt such a label, particularly for use in billing in the
United States. There was general agreement that this would not be desirable. Such a category evades the
requirement for accurate physical and psychiatric diagnoses. It was considered that where both physical
and psychological disorders might occur together, it was preferable to make both physical and psychiatric
diagnoses and to indicate the contribution, if any, of each diagnosis to the patient’s pain. In this approach
pain is seen as a unitary phenomenon experientially, but still one that may have more than one cause; and
of course the causes may all vary in importance. It was also noted that the term Chronic Pain Syndrome is
often, unfortunately, used pejoratively.”
1. The date of injury in this case is pre-2013 so would the result of 100% permanent total disability be the
same if the date of injury was on or after 1/1/2013?
The simple answer to this question is “yes.” Remember Labor Code Section 4660.1 went into effect for dates of
injury on or after 1/1/2013 and limits allowing permanent disability for psyche, sleep disorders, and sexual
dysfunction unless there is a catastrophic injury or the injury was a result of a violent act, incorporating Labor
Code Section 3208.3. In a case like Collie where the injured worker sustained severe sequelae to her spinal
surgeries and other parts of body, a judge could easily have made a formal finding that her injury was
catastrophic, as defined in the Kris Wilson case. Kris Wilson v. WCAB (2019) 84 Cal. Comp. Cases 393
(Appeals Board en banc decision), sub. qua. 84 Cal. Comp. Cases 620 (Appeals Board en banc decision)
interpreting Labor Code section 4660.1(c)(2)(B).
More importantly, counsel should always consider hiring a vocational expert as recommended in Fitzpatrick,
supra, to support a contention that the injured worker is not amenable to vocational retraining due to their
permanent disability from the work injury and that the injured worker cannot compete in the open labor market
or has no future earning capacity due to the industrial injuries, taking medical apportionment of disability into
account.
2. Why is this case a good example of how to prosecute and prove a 100% permanent disability?
Counsel first and foremost should always pay attention to the mechanism of injury. Looking forward in time,
counsel should read the medical records that show the progression of treatment and whether treatment that
was provided improved the injured worker’s activities of daily living. Clearly in this case the injured worker did
not benefit from years of treatment and functionally was not doing well for years. In terms of developing
evidence from a vocational expert, it is imperative that if the evaluating physicians found some apportionment of
permanent disability, the injured worker’s vocational expert should indicate (1) whether the injured worker is
amenable to vocational retraining, and (2) that the injured worker has a total loss of earning capacity and is
Page 14 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
permanently totally disabled based on the work-related disabilities that are caused by the industrial injury,
taking into consideration the physicians’ apportionment of permanent disability.
3. What could the defendant have done to avoid the 100% award with no apportionment, or is this
really a 100% permanent total disability case, and why?
The AME in orthopedic surgery had opined that there was some apportionment of permanent disability to the
spine due to the degenerative process. Defense counsel should have developed that by way of deposition of
the orthopedic surgeon by asking how the degenerative spinal disease caused some of the permanent
disability. In fact, this issue is discussed extensively in Escobedo v. Marshalls [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604
(Appeals Board en banc decision)], where the Appeals Board made it clear that an evaluating physician (or
treating physician), when determining the approximate percentage apportionment of permanent disability, also
has to describe how and why degenerative joint disease or degenerative spinal disease is causing permanent
disability, in accordance with the statutory mandate to do so under Labor Code Section 4663.
Lund v. Ryko Solutions Inc. (2020) 86 Cal. Comp. Cases 291, 2020 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 373
(Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)
In a post-2013 date of injury (July 8, 2014), the Appeals Board upheld a trial judge’s finding of 100% permanent
total disability pursuant to Labor Code Section 4662(b), based on the fact, and reiterated that Section 4662(b) is
not an independent method for determining permanent disability rating separate from the method provided in
Labor Code Section 4660 and in accordance with Fitzpatrick. In Lund v. Ryko Solutions Inc. [(2020) 86 Cal.
Comp. Cases 291, 2020 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 373 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)], the
Appeals Board upheld the trial judge’s finding of a 100% permanent total disability arising out of a lumbar spine
and psyche injury based on the following findings:
1. The trial judge found that the applicant’s vocational expert was more persuasive than the defendant’s
vocational expert. The vocational expert found that based solely on the effect of the physical injuries
and psychiatric sequelae caused by the industrial injury, it resulted in the applicant’s ability to benefit
from retraining. In addition, the vocational expert opined that “based on the synergistic effect of his
orthopedic and psychiatric functional limitations, and the significant impact his age will have on this
transferability of his skills and amenability to vocational rehabilitation, he has incurred a total loss of
labor market as well as a total loss of occupational capacity.” The WCAB panel concluded that the
applicant’s vocational expert’s reporting makes clear that the applicant is permanently totally disabled
as a consequence of his industrial injury, without consideration of his discussion of vocational
apportionment.
2. The AME indicated that the WPI ratings should be added per Athens Administrators v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (Kite) [(2013) 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 213 (writ denied)]. In the within case, the psychiatrist
was deposed and testified that the result of the applicant’s orthopedic disability affects him in an
entirely different manner than his psychiatric disability. The AME in psychiatry found applicant’s
psychiatric and physical impairments, while related, affected him in different ways that would not be
rated accurately if the impairments were combined using the Combined Values Chart. The psychiatric
AME testified:
The studies show that there’s actually neurophysiological changes that occur with chronic pain. Once
the depression starts it’s a different animal. It’s not the case that as your pain does up and down your
depression goes up and down. There’s no direct correlation with the progression of the illness. His
depression is a psychiatric disorder. There’s a disruption in his neurochemical functioning in this brain,
in connectivity between sites in this brain, and all of this is shown through research. Psychiatric
disorders are not something that’s imagined. There are actual physiologic changes, and decreasing the
pain will not necessarily take away the disorder.
3. The orthopedic AME reviewed the psychiatric AME report and deposition and wrote a supplemental
report, stating that the psychiatric AME’s findings are “separate and distinct” from the orthopedic
findings, and it is “medically reasonable to conclude the most accurate impairment rating would be to
add the psychiatric and physical impairments in this case.”
Page 15 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
4. The 10% apportionment from both the orthopedic and psyche medical-legal physicians did not negate
the ultimate trial judge’s finding of 100% permanent disability. The applicant’s vocational expert
indicated permanent total disability occurred, taking into account the 10% apportionment per the
medical-legal conclusions.
5. The trial judge made a finding that the applicant sustained a catastrophic injury in accordance with Labor
Code Section 4660.1(c)(2)(b) and Wilson v. State of CA Cal Fire [(2019) 84 Cal. Comp. Cases 393
(Appeals Board en banc decision)]. The case fell into one of the many categories listed in Wilson,
including the severity of treatment, where in this case the applicant went through a two-day
decompression and fusion spinal surgery (involving an anterior then posterior approaches); a
functional capacity evaluation, and sub rosa video that actually was used by the applicant’s counsel to
accurately depict the applicant’s physical limitations five years after the surgery that were also
consistent with his credible testimony. The video showed the applicant was barely able to walk—less
than 1 mile per hour with a cautious and slow gait.
Counsel should also read the trial judge’s report and recommendation in this case in order to understand fully
the preparation and development of the record in a case where the strict WPI ratings adjusted to 88%
permanent disability less the 10% apportionment. The case resulted in a 100% award that this injured worker
deserved despite the apportionment made by the two AMEs. This case is a great template for counsel to use in
the appropriate case and is like a recipe for the proper prosecution of a potential 100% case that is post-
Fitzpatrick.
Ryan v. State of CA Department of Corrections & Rehabilitation (2022) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases 56, 2022 Cal.
Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 272 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)
This case is a post-Fitzpatrick matter involving separate cases of three specific injuries and one cumulative
trauma injury in which the trial judge found permanent total disability pursuant to Labor Code Section 4662(b).
The dates of all four injuries occurred on or after January 1, 2013. The Appeals Board panel agreed that the
applicant is permanently totally disabled as a result of a combination of orthopedic conditions found by an
agreed medical examiner. There are two important take away factors in this case. The first one is: Labor Code
Section 4660.1(g) provides “…nothing in this section shall preclude a finding of permanent total disability in
accordance with Labor Code Section 4662” and therefore Labor Code Section 4662(b) specifically provides that
permanent disability shall be determined “in accordance with the fact” and the WCAB can rely on substantial
evidence in a post 2012 date of injury to rebut a scheduled permanent disability rating and find 100% total
disability [see also Manvelian v. Edris Plastics Mfg., 2021 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 298 (Appeals Board
noteworthy panel decision)].
The second take away in this case is that even though the AME concluded that the CT injury caused 40% of
the permanent disability and 40% was caused by the specific injuries, he explained he could not parcel out, with
reasonable medical probability, percentages to which each of the injuries causally contributed to the applicant’s
overall permanent disability and, therefore, they were “inextricably intertwined” and an exception to Benson v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2009) 170 Cal. App. 4th 1535, 89 Cal. Rptr. 3d 166, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113].
The Appeals Board also pointed out that, unlike what occurred in the Fitzpatrick case, in this case there was a
vocational expert who opined that the applicant was not amenable for retraining and could not compete in the
open labor market, citing LeBouef v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(1983) 34 Cal. 3d 234, 193 Cal. Rptr. 547,
48 Cal. Comp. Cases 587]. Most importantly, the Appeals Board reminded us that a medical-legal doctor “is
qualified to opine that an injured employee is so disabled by the industrial injury that he is incapable of working
in the open labor market,” citing Brower v. David Jones Construction [(2014) 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 550, 553-
556 (Appeals Board en banc decision)].
However, the Appeals Board remanded the case back to the trial level for the AME to determine whether there
is still 100% permanent total disability after apportionment, taking into account any pre-existing conditions that
occurred prior to the pending industrial injuries. Counsel is reminded that a medical-legal analysis can result in
a physician apportioning between separate industrial injuries (where, in this case, the AME said he could not do
so) and apportioning between industrial and non-industrial factors. The Appeals Board concluded in this case
that the trial judge relied on the incorrect premise based on Hikida that the applicant’s permanent disability was
entirely caused by the spinal surgeries and the AME did not take into account non-industrial factors. The AME
Page 16 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
never said the disability was entirely caused by the spinal surgeries. Instead, the AME found that the applicant
had a pre-existing spinal condition in the form of grade I spondylolisthesis at L5-S1, mild degenerative disc
disease at T12-L1 with Schmorl nodes and endplate changes from L1 to L3 pre-dating the 2015 industrial
injuries. The AME then apportioned 10% of the cervical spine impairment, 20% of the thoracic spine
impairment, and 20% of the lumbar impairment to the pre-existing pathologies.
The Appeals Board suggested that upon remand to the trial level, the judge develop the record for the AME to
clarify his conclusions and for the vocational expert to take into account the AME’s apportionment to non-
industrial factors. In fact, it is possible that the vocational expert, upon remand for further development of the
record, may conclude that the applicant has permanent total disability, taking into account the apportionment to
non-industrial factors as concluded by the AME. A vocational expert can hypothetically conclude that even
taking medical apportionment into account, the injured worker would most probably be unable to work based on
the residual permanent disability after considering medical apportionment.
County of Sonoma /Health Services Department v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Helper) (2023) 88 Cal.
Comp. Cases 309, 2023 Cal. Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 4 (writ denied)
An Appeals Board panel affirmed a trial judge’s findings that the applicant sustained a 100% permanent total
disability after apportionment due to a specific injury to his right foot and ankle based on a vocational expert’s
opinion that the applicant is not amenable to vocational rehabilitation and was precluded from employment due
to work restrictions. The vocational expert’s opinion constituted substantial evidence to rebut a strict AMA rating
of 54% permanent disability pursuant to the third method of rebuttal under Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. [(2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624]. Despite medical
apportionment of 15% to non-industrial factors, the vocational expert opined that the injured worker was not
amenable to vocational retraining and that the permanent total disability was due entirely from his industrial
injury and, therefore, not apportionable. Here, the AME opined that 15% of the applicant’s impairment was due
to pre-existing cerebral palsy, but the vocational expert dealt with that issue by stating:
While a 15% apportionment to non-industrial factors (CP), it is my opinion that the limitations that resulted
from the on-the-job injury would prevent Mr. Helper from being employed. While there is a 15% non-
industrial affect, it should be noted that Mr. Helper was able to be successfully employed with the County of
Sonoma. His non-industrial condition did not affect his ability to perform the Drug & Alcohol Counseling
position.
Essentially, the vocational expert concluded that the applicant’s pre-existing cerebral palsy did not result in any
kind of work restrictions or wage loss prior to the industrial injury. Both the AME and the vocational expert
concluded that the applicant’s work restrictions were entirely due to the industrial injury and, therefore, his
permanent disability was not subject to apportionment. The Court of Appeal, in denying defendant’s petition for
writ of mandate, stated: “Because the County has not shown that the Board’s decision contravenes the rule of
Acme Steel v. Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board (2013) 218 Cal. App. 4th 1137, (1143-1144) [annulling
non-apportioned 100 percent permanent disability award where employee’s loss of hearing could not be
attributed sole to current industrial injury.]”
[6] Ogilvie Rebuttal for Injuries On or After 1/1/2013
Is Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp.
Cases 624] still alive? See Ch. 7, § 7.06 of this guidebook for a discussion of rebutting a permanent disability
rating for injuries prior to 1/1/2013 that fall under the 2005 PDRS.
However, for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, there is no DFEC adjustment factor to rebut. A corollary
question is whether or not the 1.4 “adjustment factor” can be rebutted. Labor Code § 4660.1 does not indicate
the basis for the “adjustment factor”—it just showed up in the latest version of SB 863, just before the final
version was written and approved by the legislature. We think the entire rating string for injuries occurring on or
after 1/1/2013 can still be rebutted in the spirit of the Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie cases—it is just a question
of how and when.
That being said, since the legislature in SB 863 specifically refers to Labor Code § 4662, we believe the
LeBoeuf case [see LeBoeuf v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1983) 34 Cal. 3d 234, 193 Cal. Rptr. 547, 48 Cal.
Comp. Cases 587] is still alive, regardless of the date of injury. However, practitioners should take note of the
Page 17 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
Dahl case, in which the court of appeal held that both Ogilvie and LeBouef required consideration of the effect
of the injury on the employee’s ability to be rehabilitated as the threshold issue, not simply whether there was a
different calculation as to the employee’s diminished earning capacity [see Contra Costa County v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl) (2015) 240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119]. For further discussion,
see Ch. 7, § 7.06.
On June 22, 2023, the Appeals Board issued an en banc decision in Nunes v. State of California, Dept. of
Motor Vehicles [(2023) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases 741 (Appeals Board en banc opinion)] in which the Appeals Board
made it clear that there is no such thing as “vocational apportionment” when a party seeks to rebut a strict
rating under the 2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule (PDRS) using a vocational expert.
On August 29, 2023, the Appeals Board issued its en banc Opinion and Order Denying Applicant’s Petition for
Reconsideration after the Applicant filed a Petition for Reconsideration of the original Appeals Board en banc
decision.
NOTE: At the time of the publication deadline of this guidebook the applicant has 45 days from August 29,
2023, to file a Petition for Writ of Mandate at the District Court of Appeal. For the sake of clarity, the
following discussion covers the Appeals Board en banc decision dated June 22, 2023, and is referred to as
“Nunes I,” while the Appeals Board en banc decision issued on August 29, 2023, is referred to as “Nunes
II.” Historically, this is the same sequence of events that had occurred in other Appeals Board en banc
decisions that ultimately ended up in the Court of Appeal. The series of cases that ended up as Milpitas
Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) discussed throughout this guidebook is a
great example.
NUNES I
In Nunes I, the trial judge found that the applicant, while employed as a vehicle field representative on
September 13, 2011, and on a continuous trauma basis for the period September 13, 2010 to September 13,
2011, suffered injuries to her cervical spine (C5-C6 fusion surgery), upper extremities, and left shoulder
resulting in 100% permanent total disability. Defendant appealed, and the Appeals Board granted the petition
for reconsideration. This case is significant because it defines what the Appeals Board requires and expects in
order for a vocational expert’s conclusions to constitute substantial vocational evidence. There are numerous
issues the Appeals Board addresses in 100% permanent and total disability cases involving both medical-legal
conclusions and the scope and role of vocational experts in light of existing case law. There is something for
everyone in this decision, and counsel is urged to read and re-read this decision whenever a vocational expert
is expected to be used in a case.
This case was remanded by the en banc Appeals Board for development of the record and, regardless of the
ultimate outcome of the case itself, counsel should read this decision and utilize the numerous takeaway factors
both for the prosecution and defense of cases involving vocational expert opinions. Remember, Appeals Board
en banc decisions are binding on all Appeals Board panels and on all trial judges. Each takeaway is listed
below, including the first three specific ones that the Appeals Board discusses in its opinion, along with some
quotable quotes:
1. Labor Code Section 4663 requires a reporting physician to make an apportionment determination and
prescribes the standard for apportionment. The Labor Code makes no statutory provision for
“vocational apportionment.”
The Appeals Board states:
‘Apportionment is the process employed by the Board to segregate the residuals of an industrial injury from
those attributable to other industrial injuries, or to nonindustrial factors, in order to fairly allocate the legal
responsibility.’ (Brodie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2007) 40 Cal.4th 1313, 1321, 72 Cal. Comp. Cases
565, quoting Ashley v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1995) 37 Cal.App.4th 320, 326; 60 Cal. Comp. Cases
683.)
Section 4663(c) provides, in relevant part:
(c) In order for a physician’s report to be considered complete on the issue of permanent disability, the
report must include an apportionment determination. A physician shall make an apportionment
determination by finding what approximate percentage of the permanent disability was caused by the
Page 18 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
direct result of injury arising out of and occurring in the course of employment and what approximate
percentage of the permanent disability was caused by other factors both before and subsequent to the
industrial injury, including prior industrial injuries.
Accordingly, section 4663(c) authorizes and requires the reporting physician to make an apportionment
determination, and further prescribes the standards the physician must use. (Lab. Code, § 4663(c);
Escobedo, supra, at pp. 607, 611-612.) Apportionment must account for “other factors both before and
subsequent to the industrial injury,” and may include disability that formerly could not have been
apportioned, including apportionment to pathology, asymptomatic prior conditions, and retroactive
prophylactic work restrictions. (Ibid.) In addition, when a physician considers all appropriate factors of
apportionment but nevertheless determines that it is not possible to approximate the percentages of each
factor contributing to the employee’s overall permanent disability to a reasonable medical probability, the
physician has made the apportionment determination required under section 4663(c).
Finally, the Appeals Board clearly mandates that there is no statutory authority for “vocational apportionment”:
Section 4663(c) does not provide, however, for collateral sources of expert opinion as to apportionment,
and further does not authorize the application of any other standard of apportionment. Accordingly,
“vocational apportionment” offered by a non-physician is not a statutorily authorized form of apportionment.
In addition, apportionment determinations that deviate from the mandatory standards described in section
4663(c) are not a valid basis upon which to determine permanent disability.
2. Vocational evidence may be used to address issues relevant to the determination of permanent
disability.
So what is the scope of vocational expert opinion in a workers’ compensation case? The Appeals Board
reiterates existing law that permanent disability is determined by a physician’s conclusions of the WPI rating
from the AMA Guides 5th Edition and application of the 2005 PDRS all in accordance with Labor Code Section
4660. But the rating should reflect an injured worker’s loss of future earning capacity that is caused by an
industrial injury, citing Brodie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2007) 40 Cal. 4th 1313, 72 Cal. Comp. Cases
565], and Department of Corrections & Rehabilitation v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Fitzpatrick) [(2018) 27
Cal. App. 5th 607, 83 Cal. Comp. Cases 1680]. The Appeals Board goes on to state:
However, the scheduled rating is not absolute. (Fitzpatrick, supra, at pp. 619-620.) A rating obtained
pursuant to the PDRS may be rebutted by showing an applicant’s diminished future earning capacity is
greater than that reflected in the PDRS. (Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2011) 197 Cal.App.4th
1262 [76 Cal.Comp.Cases 624] (Ogilvie); Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl)
(2015) 240 Cal.App.4th 746 [80 Cal.Comp.Cases 1119] (Dahl).) In analyzing the issue of whether and how
the PDRS could be rebutted, the Court of Appeal has observed:
Another way the cases have long recognized that a scheduled rating has been effectively rebutted is
when the injury to the employee impairs his or her rehabilitation, and for that reason, the employee’s
diminished future earning capacity is greater than reflected in the employee’s scheduled rating. This is
the rule expressed in LeBoeuf v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1983) 34 Cal.3d 234 [193 Cal. Rptr.
547, 666 P.2d 989].7 In LeBoeuf, an injured worker sought to demonstrate that, due to the residual
effects of his work-related injuries, he could not be retrained for suitable meaningful employment. (Id.
at pp. 237-238.) Our Supreme Court concluded that it was error to preclude LeBoeuf from making
such a showing, and held that “the fact that an injured employee is precluded from the option of
receiving rehabilitation benefits should also be taken into account in the assessment of an injured
employee’s permanent disability rating.”
(Ogilvie, supra, at p. 1274.)
Thus, ‘an employee may challenge the presumptive scheduled percentage of permanent disability
prescribed to an injury by showing a factual error in the calculation of a factor in the rating formula or
application of the formula, the omission of medical complications aggravating the employee’s disability in
preparation of the rating schedule, or by demonstrating that due to industrial injury the employee is not
amenable to rehabilitation and therefore has suffered a greater loss of future earning capacity than
reflected in the scheduled rating.” (Ogilvie, supra, at p. 1277.) The court in Ogilvie thus affirmed the
Page 19 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
continued relevance of vocational evidence with respect to the determination of permanent disability.
(Applied Materials v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals. Bd. (Chadburn) (2021) 64 Cal.App.5th 1042 [86 Cal. Comp.
Cases 331]; see also County of Sonoma/Health Services Dept. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Helper)
(2023) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases 309 [2023 Cal. Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 4] (writ den.).) [Note: footnote 8 omitted
from text]
In addition to the applications for vocational evidence contemplated in Ogilvie, supra, vocational reporting
may also be admitted as evidence and considered by the WCJ under other circumstances. (Lab. Code,
§§ 5703(j), 5307.7; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 8, § 10685.)
The Appeals Board en banc decision also indicates that “since evaluating physicians play an integral role in the
determination of permanent disability,” evaluating physicians should always review the reports and deposition
testimony, if any, of vocational experts. In addition, physicians can conclude based solely on medical findings
that an injured worker is permanently totally disabled on an industrial basis.
The Appeals Board states:
It is therefore appropriate and often necessary that evaluating physicians consider the vocational evidence
as part of their determination of permanent disability, including factors such as whether applicant is feasible
for vocational rehabilitation, and whether the reasons underlying applicant’s non-feasibility for vocational
retraining arise solely out of the present industrial injury or are multifactorial. As is noted in Guzman, supra,
it is the physician that must exercise their “skill, knowledge and experience as well as other considerations”
in formulating an opinion on permanent disability. (Guzman, supra, at p. 828.) Thus, vocational evidence is
often relevant and appropriately considered by the reporting physician in their evaluation of issues
pertaining to permanent disability. (See, e.g., Qualcomm, Inc. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Brown)
(2019) 84 Cal. Comp. Cases 531, 2019 Cal. Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 35 (writ den.) [WCJ appropriately relied on
agreed medical evaluator opinion that injured employee was precluded from gainful employment and
vocational rehabilitation].) [Note: footnote 9 omitted from text]
3. Vocational evidence must address medical apportionment, and may not substitute impermissible
“vocational apportionment” in place of otherwise valid medical apportionment.
The Appeals Board decision cites a number of important and helpful case law that counsel for both the injured
worker and the employer/claims administrator should become familiar with, involving the rebuttal of a
permanent disability rating string:
The same considerations used to evaluate whether a medical expert’s opinion constitutes substantial
evidence are equally applicable to vocational reporting. In order to constitute substantial evidence, a
vocational expert’s opinion must detail the history and evidence in support of its conclusions, as well as
“how and why” any specific condition or factor is causing permanent disability. (Escobedo, supra, at p. 611;
see also E.L. Yeager v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Gatten) (2006) 145 Cal. App. 4th 922 [71 Cal.
Comp. Cases 1687].)
Vocational evidence may assist the parties and the court in evaluating the various factors precluding
successful vocational rehabilitation. In Thomas v. Peter Kiewit Sons’, Inc. (March 23, 2021, ADJ9229556)
2021 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 90 (writ den. sub nom. Kiewit Infrastructure West Co. v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (2021) 86 Cal. Comp. Cases 711), the vocational expert identified the factors of
apportionment that were purely industrial in nature, and based on the QME’s assessment of the synergistic
effect of the combined impairments, determined that applicant had sustained a total loss of future earning
capacity. In Bagobri v. AC Transit (October 8, 2019, ADJ2559682) 2019 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 384],
functional capacity evaluations and vocational expert reporting established that applicant was not feasible
for vocational retraining due to his work restrictions, and expert evidence further established that those
physical restrictions arose solely out of medical treatment for applicant’s industrial injury. Because the work
restrictions placed on applicant following his industrial injury precluded him from gainful employment,
applicant effectively lost all future earning capacity due solely to his industrial injury. (Id. at p. 35.)
Vocational evidence may also be used to parse permanent disability caused by multiple body parts or
systems. In Lehman v. Walgreens (February 3, 2017, ADJ8811286) 2017 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 66,
vocational evidence was used to distinguish between multiple injured body parts to determine that
Page 20 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
applicant was permanently and totally disabled on a psychiatric basis alone, when applicant’s psychiatric
disability was not subject to apportionment. Additionally, vocational evidence demonstrated that the
combination of applicant’s un-apportioned psychiatric disability, combined with his post-apportionment
orthopedic disability, yielded disability that was permanent and total, without apportionment. (Id. at pp. 25-
26.) Conversely, vocational evidence may also assist the parties in evaluating the effect of multiple
disabilities spread across multiple body parts and systems. In Cemex, Inv. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(Burdine) (2013) 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 780, 2013 Cal. Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 117 (writ den.), the WCJ relied
on the vocational expert’s evaluation of applicant’s disability arising out of injury to the neck, back, upper
extremities, left thumb, and psyche to gauge the impact of applicant’s industrial injuries on his employability
in the open labor market, ultimately finding that the opinions of the Agreed Medical Evaluator (AME) and
the vocational expert supported a finding of permanent and total disability.
The case law cited above by the Appeals Board are examples of when vocational expert opinion is credible,
reliable, and persuasive evidence to rebut a strict rating string. In the latter part of the Appeals Board decision
in Nunes, the Board discusses why there is no such concept as “vocational apportionment” that replaces
otherwise valid medical apportionment, citing the Borman and Lindh cases:
While vocational evidence may be utilized to assess factors of permanent disability, including whether an
injured employee is feasible for vocational retraining, in order to constitute substantial evidence, vocational
reporting must consider valid medical apportionment. (Acme Steel v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(Borman) (2013) 218 Cal. App. 4th 1137, 1142-1143, 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 751 (Borman); City of
Petaluma v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals. Bd. (Lindh) (2018) 29 Cal. App .5th 1175, 83 Cal. Comp. Cases
1869 (Lindh).)
In Borman, applicant claimed a cumulative injury ending in 2003 resulting in bilateral hearing loss.
Applicant sustained a prior hearing loss injury in 1993, resulting in an award of 22 percent permanent
disability. The AME in 2004 determined that applicant’s total hearing loss was 60 percent attributable to
“noise-induced hearing loss,” which included applicant’s prior injury in 1993, and 40 percent to “other
factors.” (Id. at p. 1140.) The WCJ determined that applicant had sustained permanent and total disability
based on vocational expert testimony that there were no jobs available to applicant in the labor market, and
that applicant had not sustained a loss of earnings following the 1993 injury. Following the Appeals Board’s
denial of reconsideration, the Court of Appeal reversed, observing that while “we do not take issue with the
WCALJ’s conclusion that Borman could rebut the rating schedule’s DFEC by offering vocational expert
testimony showing 100 percent loss of earning capacity … [t]he WCALJ erred … by failing to address the
issue of apportionment.” (Id. at p. 1142.) Noting the “clear intent” of the Legislature in enacting Senate Bill
No. 899 “to charge employers only with that percentage of permanent disability directly caused by the
current industrial injury,” the Borman court determined that the evidence presented clear and unambiguous
evidence of prior disability, and “[f]aced with this unrebutted substantial medical evidence from the AME,
the WCAB should have parceled out the ‘causative sources—nonindustrial, prior industrial, current
industrial—and decide[d] the amount directly caused by the current industrial source.’” (Id. at p. 1143.)
Consequently, factors of apportionment must be carefully considered, even in cases where an injured
worker is permanently and totally disabled as a result of an inability to participate in vocational retraining. In
addressing apportionment, the vocational expert must disclose familiarity with the concepts of
apportionment and set forth in detail the basis for the opinion, and may not rely on facts that are not
germane, on inadequate medical histories or examinations, on incorrect legal theories, or on surmise,
speculation, conjecture, or guess. (Hegglin v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd. (1971) 4 Cal.3d 162, 36 Cal.
Comp. Cases 93; Place, supra, 3 Cal. 3d 372; Zemke v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd. (1968) 68 Cal. 2d
794, 33 Cal. Comp. Cases 358.)
The apportionment analysis required under 4663(a) and Escobedo, supra, does not permit reliance on
facts offered in support of a competing theory of apportionment. (Lindh, supra, at p. 1193 [suggestion that
apportionment is required only where there is medical evidence the asymptomatic preexisting condition
would invariably have become symptomatic, even without the workplace injury, reflects prior law]; Dahl,
supra, at p. 758 [“The Ogilvie court did not sanction rebuttal of the statutory Schedule by a competing
empirical methodology—no matter how superior the applicant and her expert claim it may be.”].)
Page 21 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
Accordingly, a vocational report is not substantial evidence if it relies upon facts that are not germane,
marshalled in the service of an incorrect legal theory. Examples of reliance on facts that are not germane
often fall under the rubric of “vocational apportionment,” and include assertions that applicant’s disability is
solely attributable to the current industrial injury because applicant had no prior work restrictions (Zmek v.
State of California, Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (December 13, 2019, ADJ8493350) [2019
Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 552]), or was able to adequately perform their job (Lindh, supra, at p. 1194),
or suffered no wage loss prior to the current industrial injury (Borman, supra, at p. 1141).
The analysis described by Escobedo, Borman, and Lindh requires an evaluation of all factors of
apportionment, so long as they are otherwise supported by substantial medical evidence, and irrespective
of whether they were the result of pathology, asymptomatic prior conditions, or whether those factors
manifested in diminished earnings, work restrictions, or an inability to perform job duties.
4. What is the role of a trial judge in evaluating evidence submitted to rebut a rating string?
The Appeals Board decision in Nunes serves as an imprimatur for a workers’ compensation judge’s evaluation
of evidence when a rating string is being rebutted by a party using medical and/or vocational evidence. A trial
judge must “weigh the totality of the evidence adduced, and to enter a corresponding findings, order, or award.
(Lab. Code, § 5313).” The Appeals Board goes on to specifically mandate trial judges to do the following:
We emphasize that the WCJ is vested with the full power, jurisdiction, and authority, to hear and determine
all issues of fact and law presented, and it is within the sound discretion of the WCJ to accept or reject the
testimony of an expert witness, so long as the WCJ does not act arbitrarily. (Bonner v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (1990) 225 Cal.App.3d 1023 [55 Cal. Comp. Cases 470]; Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon
(1971) 3 Cal. 3d 875, 890, 92 Cal. Rptr. 162.) It is also well-established that the WCJ enjoys wide latitude
to admit evidence necessary to determine the substantive rights of the parties, but in doing so, must
consider whether the vocational evidence is substantial, whether it rests upon relevant facts, applies a
correct legal theory, and refrains from surmise, speculation, conjecture, or guess. (Lab. Code, § 5708;
Place, supra, 3 Cal. 3d 372; Owings v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1948) 31 Cal. 2d 689, 692, 13 Cal. Comp.
Cases 80.)
In sum, vocational evidence continues to be relevant to the issue of permanent disability, and may be
offered to rebut a scheduled rating by establishing that an injured worker is not feasible for vocational
retraining. Vocational evidence may also be considered by evaluating physicians as relevant to their
determination of permanent disability, and may assist the parties and the WCJ in assessing those factors
of permanent disability. Finally, the WCJ retains the duty and the authority to review and weigh the medical
and vocational evidence, and to enter corresponding orders, findings, decisions, and awards that are
supported by substantial evidence in light of the entire record, including orders for development of the
record where necessary. (Garza v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd. (1970) 3 Cal.3d 312 [35 Cal. Comp.
Cases 500]; see also Kuykendall v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2000) 79 Cal.App.4th 396, 404 [65 Cal.
Comp. Cases 264] [the WCJ or the Board may not leave undeveloped matters which its acquired
specialized knowledge should identify as requiring further evidence].)
The Appeals Board then refers to footnote 10 which states as follows [Nunes v. State of California, Dept. of
Motor Vehicles (2023) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases 741, 754 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]:
As we noted in Escobedo, supra, “[t]he issue of the causation of permanent disability, for purposes of
apportionment, is distinct from the issue of the causation of an injury. (See Reyes v. Hart Plastering (2005)
70 Cal. Comp. Cases 223 (Significant Panel Decision).) Thus, the percentage to which an applicant’s injury
is causally related to his or her employment is not necessarily the same as the percentage to which an
applicant’s permanent disability is causally related to his or her injury. The analyses of these issues are
different and the medical evidence for any percentage conclusions might be different.” (Escobedo, supra,
at p. 611.)
The Appeals Board indicates the role of a trial judge in evaluating the evidence when the injured worker is
deemed unable to benefit from vocational retraining due to an industrial injury where the evaluating physicians
have indicated some medical apportionment [Nunes v. State of California, Dept. of Motor Vehicles (2023) 88
Cal. Comp. Cases 741, 754 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]:
Page 22 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
Therefore, an analysis of whether there are valid sources of apportionment is still required even when
applicant is deemed not feasible for vocational retraining and is permanently and totally disabled as a
result. In such cases, the WCJ must determine whether the cause of the permanent and total disability
includes nonindustrial or prior industrial factors, or whether the permanent disability reflected in applicant’s
inability to meaningfully participate in vocational retraining arises solely out of the current industrial injury.
The Appeals Board reminds trial judges to make determinations of fact and law for each injury claimed by an
injured worker [Nunes v. State of California, Dept. of Motor Vehicles (2023) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases 741, 756
(Appeals Board en banc decision)]:
Here, the F&A fails to adequately address the issues submitted for decision by the parties, including
permanent disability and apportionment for each injury claimed by applicant. Moreover, the Opinion on
Decision fails to explain in detail the WCJ’s analysis as to each claimed injury and the associated issues
submitted for decision, and further fails to provide appropriate citation to the evidentiary record or to legal
authority. As we noted in Hamilton, supra, an opinion on decision that states the evidence relied upon and
specifies in detail the reasons for the decision will serve to “assist the reviewing court to ascertain the
principles relied upon by the lower tribunal, to help that tribunal avoid careless or arbitrary action, and to
make the right of appeal or of seeking review more meaningful.” (Evans v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd.
(1968) 68 Cal.2d 753, 755 [33 Cal. Comp. Cases 350, 351].)
The current record does not afford an adequate basis for review of the evidentiary or legal conclusions
reached by the F&A. Consequently, we will rescind the F&A and return this matter to the trial level for
further proceedings and decision by the WCJ addressing each claimed injury. Upon return of this matter to
the trial level, the parties may wish to obtain supplemental reporting from their respective medical and
vocational experts to address apportionment in accord with the principles explained above.
5. This decision also applies to post 1/1/2013 dates of injury (footnote 8) even though this case involves
pre-1/1/2013 dates of injury.
Footnote 8 states as follows [Nunes v. State of California, Dept. of Motor Vehicles (2023) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases
741, 750 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]:
We further observe that notwithstanding the statutory changes to the calculation of diminished future
earning capacity (DFEC) made by section 4660.1, the holding in Ogilvie, which provides that vocational
evidence may be offered to rebut the permanent disability rating schedule, continues to apply to all dates of
injury, including those occurring on or after January 1, 2013. (See County of Alameda v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (Williams) (2020) 85 Cal. Comp. Cases 792, 2020 Cal. Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 64 (writ den.); The
Conco Companies v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Sandoval) (2019) 84 Cal. Comp. Cases 1067, 2019
Cal. Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 112 (writ den.); Hennessey v. Compass Group (2019) 84 Cal. Comp. Cases 756,
2019 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 121.)
6. A “rebuttal of the AMA Guides” is not the proper way of thinking of challenging ratings—the rebuttal
is of the permanent disability string rating and not of the AMA Guides.
Footnote 9 states [Nunes v. State of California, Dept. of Motor Vehicles (2023) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases 741, 751
(Appeals Board en banc decision)]:
The AMA Guides further provide that “[p]hysicians with the appropriate skills, training and knowledge may
address some of the implications of the medical impairment toward work disability and future employment
… more complicated are the cases in which the physician is requested to make a broad judgment
regarding an individual’s ability to return to any job in his or her field. A decision of this scope usually
requires input from medical and nonmedical experts, such as vocational specialists ….” (AMA Guides, 5th
Ed., § 1.9, at pp. 13-14.)
7. What was wrong with the vocational expert opinions in Nunes?
Although the attorneys in Nunes properly and correctly sent the vocational reports to the medical-legal
evaluators in this case for review and commentary, the vocational reports did not properly address medical
apportionment. The orthopedic QME apportioned 40% of the applicant’s cervical spine impairment to
nonindustrial degenerative disc disease, and 60% of the applicant’s carpal tunnel syndrome impairment to pre-
existing non-industrial factors. The applicant’s vocational expert only addressed the cervical spine medical
Page 23 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
apportionment and did not discuss or show any consideration for the carpal tunnel impairment and medical
apportionment. The Appeals Board decision on this issue states:
The parsing of the various body parts/systems in this context, and the individualized analysis of their effect
on applicant’s ability to benefit from vocational retraining, constitutes a valid and appropriate use for
vocational evidence.
However, having limited his consideration to only one body part, Mr. Gonzales then asserts that applicant’s
prior award of disability and degenerative changes need not be considered, because they did not manifest
in an inability to perform pre-injury job functions or reduced earning capacity. By discounting prior
impairment because it did not manifest in the form of diminished pre-injury earnings, the analysis fails to
account for “disability that formerly could not have been apportioned (e.g., pathology, asymptomatic prior
conditions, and retroactive prophylactic work preclusions) ….” (Escobedo, supra, at p. 607.) That is, the
analysis fails to determine whether there is “substantial medical evidence that establishes that the
asymptomatic condition or pathology was a contributing cause of the disability.” (Lindh, supra, at p. 1882.)
Thus, we conclude that the vocational reporting from Mr. Gonzales does not adequately consider the issue
of apportionment.
The Appeals Board then criticizes the defendant’s vocational expert’s opinion “engages in speculation
rendering it unreliable. [The defense vocational expert’s reporting] does not explain how he arrived at the 10
percent figure, other than to note the factors of nonindustrial medical and legal apportionment will likely interfere
with applicant’s reentry into the labor market. Accordingly, we are persuaded that [the defense vocational
expert’s] report also does not constitute substantial evidence on the issue of apportionment.” The Appeals
Board goes on to say:
In sum, factors of apportionment must be carefully considered, even in cases where an injured worker is
permanently and totally disabled as a result of an inability to participate in vocational retraining. Expert
vocational testimony may be utilized to identify and distinguish industrial and nonindustrial vocational
factors, but may not substitute impermissible “vocational apportionment” in place of otherwise valid medical
apportionment. Finally, we observe that an un-apportioned award may be appropriate where it can be
established through competent medical and/or vocational evidence that the current industrial injury is the
sole causative factor for the employee’s residual permanent disability.
NUNES II
After Nunes I, the applicant associated in a new applicant’s attorney, who filed a Petition for Reconsideration of
the Appeals Board’s June 22, 2023 en banc decision. On August 29, 2023, the Appeals Board issued its
second en banc decision upholding its earlier decision [Nunes v. State of California, Dept. of Motor Vehicles
(2023) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases – (Appeals Board en banc opinion) (“Nunes II”)]. The applicant has until October
13, 2023, to file a Petition for Writ of Review with the Court of Appeal. This is an ironic date because the author
of this treatise is scheduled to teach apportionment for the statewide judge’s training set for 10:00 a.m. on
October 13, 2023!
In Nunes II, the Appeals Board reiterated its findings and conclusions:
1. Labor Code section 4663requires a reporting physician to make an apportionment determination and
prescribes the standard for apportionment, and that the Labor Code makes no statutory provision for
“vocational apportionment”;
2. Vocational evidence may be used to address issues relevant to the determination of permanent
disability; and
3. Vocational evidence must address apportionment, and may not substitute impermissible “vocational
apportionment” in place of otherwise valid medical apportionment.
Applicant contended in her petition for reconsideration that “the apportionment analysis described by the QME
is speculative and not substantial, and that applicant is entitled to an un-apportioned award. Applicant further
contends that vocational evidence may be used to characterize and quantify permanent disability, and that the
vocational opinions expressed by vocational experts may differ from the medical evidence. Applicant asserts
that the prohibition against using vocational apportionment in place of otherwise valid medical apportionment
Page 24 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
will result in ‘pass-through’ apportionment that is not substantial evidence; that defendant failed to meet its
burden of proof under section 4664; and that our June 22, 2023 Opinion may result in protracted discovery and
litigation.” Applicant relied on and cited the writ denied decision in Pacific Compensation Insurance Co. v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Nilsen) [(2013) 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 722 (writ den.)].
The Appeals Board first describes the procedural posture of this case and indicates on its current decision that
it is adopting and incorporating its original decision in Nunes I, without any changes or modifications. The case
in chief had not been fully developed at the time the trial judge issued the findings and award dated February
21, 2023, and the Appeals Board remanded the case back to the trial level for development of the record to
“adequately address permanent disability and apportionment for each injury claimed by the Applicant.”
Then the Appeals Board reiterated its earlier holding that “vocational evidence must address apportionment and
may not substitute impermissible ‘vocational apportionment’ in place of otherwise valid medical apportionment.”
Both the medical opinions of evaluating physicians and the vocational opinions of vocational experts must
“detail the history and evidence in support of their respective conclusions, including ‘how and why’ a condition
of factor is causing permanent disability,” citing Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604
(WCAB en banc decision).” The Appeals Board discusses the exclusive role of the medical-legal evaluator or
treating physician who determines medical apportionment. The Appeals Board in Nunes II then quotes the often
most quoted part of Escobedo, which is worthwhile to fully quote here:
[T]o be substantial evidence on the issue of the approximate percentages of permanent disability due to
the direct results of the injury and the approximate percentage of permanent disability due to other factors,
a medical opinion must be framed in terms of reasonable medical probability, it must not be speculative, it
must be based on pertinent facts and on an adequate examination and history, and it must set forth
reasoning in support of its conclusion.
The Appeals Board discusses the division of labor between a physician and a vocational expert: The physicians
determine medical apportionment, and the issue of apportionment is essentially “hands off” by vocational
experts. In other words, vocational experts must consider only medical apportionment conclusions by
physicians and cannot substitute their own “vocational apportionment.”
The Appeals Board provides the following guidance that it did not provide in Nunes I:
1. It is axiomatic that in those instances where the WCJ determines that no evaluating physician has
identified valid legal apportionment, Applicant is entitled to an unapportioned award.
2. A corollary of this principle is that if no evaluating physician has identified medical apportionment, a
vocational expert is not authorized to interpose an independent apportionment analysis. This is
because Labor Code section 4663 does not authorize an expert witness to offer a superseding
“vocational apportionment” scheme independent of that identified by the evaluating physicians.
3. Similarly, if an evaluating physician identifies apportionment, but the WCJ determines that the
apportionment analysis does not constitute substantial evidence and that development of the record is
not otherwise warranted, Applicant is entitled to an unapportioned award. [Citing: Escobedo, supra,
and Boone v. State of California - Dept. of Transp. (July 23, 2018, ADJ7974582) [2018 Cal. Wrk.
Comp. P.D. LEXIS 348]; Maverick v. Marriott Int’l (January 30, 2015, ADJ2034254) [2015 Cal. Wrk.
Comp. P.D. LEXIS 50].]
4. It is also well established that a physician had made the apportionment determination required under
Labor Code Section 4663(c) where the evaluating physician has carefully considered factors of
apportionment, but has nonetheless determined that it is not possible to approximate the percentages
of each factor contributing to the employee’s overall permanent disability to a reasonable medical
probability. Under those circumstances, assuming that the WCJ or the WCAB determines that
development of the record is not warranted, applicant would then be entitled to an unapportioned
award. [Citing: Opinion, at p. 8; Benson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 1535
[74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113, 133]; see also James v. Pacific Bell Tel. Co. (May 10, 2010, ADJ1357786)
[2010 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 188].]
Page 25 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
5. The Appeals Board rejected Applicant’s argument that a vocational expert is permitted to include a
different approach to causation of permanent disability. A vocational expert cannot offer a competing or
an alternative apportionment analysis because that is inconsistent with Labor Code Section 4663.
Apportionment of permanent disability under Labor Code Section 4663 “authorizes and requires that
apportionment determinations be made by evaluating physicians” [italics by the Appeals Board].
6. Alternate apportionment schemes espoused by vocational or other expert iiwitnesses are not statutorily
authorized and may not be used to circumvent the apportionment mandated by the legislature in the
exercise of their plenary power to create and enforce a complete system of workers’ compensation.
[Citing: Cal. Const., art. XIV, § 4; Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl) (2015)
240 Cal.App.4th 746, 758 [80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119] (Dahl).]
7. In Footnote 7 of Nunes II, the Appeals Board references the Fitzpatrick case: “We also note that in
Estrada, the WCJ’s finding that applicant had sustained permanent and total disability was made ‘in
accordance with the fact,’ pursuant to section 4662(b). The Court of Appeal has subsequently held in
Department of Corrections & Rehabilitation v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Fitzpatrick) (2018) 27
Cal.App.5th 607, 610 [83 Cal. Comp. Cases 1680) that section 4662(b) does not provide a separate
path to a finding of permanent and total disability. Rather, Fitzpatrick clarified that it is section 4660
which governs how a finding and award of permanent total disability may be made ‘in accordance with
the fact.’” [Citing: Ibid. Note: Citation to Estrada is omitted since the Appeals Board indicates it is not
applicable in light of Fitzpatrick.]
Then the Appeals Board discusses the context of what kind of case would allow a finding of permanent total
disability despite medical apportionment to a pre-existing condition where the current diagnosis is causing the
total disability:
Applicant’s Petition refers us to the writ-denied decision in Pacific Compensation Insurance Co. v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (Nilsen) (2013) 78 Cal.Comp.Cases 722 [2013 Cal. Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 90] (Nilsen)for
the proposition that industrial injuries can result in a total loss of earning capacity, notwithstanding factors
of apportionment including a prior award and preexisting psychiatric treatment. (Petition, at p. 7:9.) In
Nilsen, applicant’s industrial injuries resulted in the development of a new and distinct medical condition in
the form of a chronic pain syndrome. (Nilsen, supra, at p. 723.)6 Multiple evaluating physicians opined that
the chronic pain syndrome standing alone resulted in permanent and total disability without apportionment.
(Nilsen, supra, at pp. 723-724.) While the record reflected other valid factors of apportionment, the WCJ
concluded that the medical and vocational evidence supported a finding of permanent and total disability
based on the opinions of the evaluating physicians who determined that applicant’s inability to compete for
wages was caused solely by his chronic pain syndrome, a condition for which there was no valid
apportionment. (Ibid.) In sum, nothing in the analysis in our Opinion is inconsistent with the outcome in
Nilsen.
A second scenario arises “when an evaluating physician identifies a valid basis for apportionment (a prior injury,
subsequent injury, prior pathology, non-industrial disease process, or non-industrial condition causing
permanent disability) which must be considered as part of any determination of permanent disability, including a
vocational expert’s evaluation of an injured worker’s feasibility for vocational retraining.” The Appeals Board in
Nunes II states:
[A] finding of permanent and total disability notwithstanding the presence of valid nonindustrial
apportionment is permissible, so long as the medical and vocational evidence establishes that the
permanent and total disability arises solely out of industrial conditions or factors, that is, exclusive of
nonindustrial or prior industrial conditions or factors. (Acme Steel v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Borman)
(2013) 218 Cal.App.4th 1137, 1142-1143 [78 Cal.Comp.Cases 751] (Borman); City of Petaluma v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals. Bd. (Lindh) (2018) 29 Cal.App.5th 1175 [83 Cal.Comp.Cases 1869] (Lindh).) It is
not permissible, however, to circumvent valid medical apportionment by attempting to introduce a
competing theory of apportionment such as “vocational apportionment.
The Appeals Board reiterated the problem with the original trial decision in Nunes—that both vocational experts
attempted to describe an apportionment analysis that is inconsistent with the apportionment described by the
Page 26 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
evaluating QMEs. Both the applicant and defendant vocational experts sought to impermissibly interpose
vocational apportionment in place of medical apportionment.
The Appeals Board also discusses Labor Code Sections 3202.5 and 5705, which indicate that each party has a
respective burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence and that the burden of proof rests upon the
party holding the affirmative of the issue. The applicant has the burden of proving injury AOE/COE, temporary
total disability, permanent disability, and need for medical treatment, while the defendant has the burden of
proof of apportionment of permanent disability.
The Appeals Board offers the parties a roadmap to successful development of the record in this case: to ask
the QMEs to prepare supplemental reports on the issue of “whether the factors giving rise to the Applicant’s
non-feasibility for vocational retraining is identified by the vocational experts are themselves subject to medical
apportionment, or whether Applicant’s inability to participate in vocational retraining is attributable solely to
current industrially related conditions or factors.” The Appeals Board mandates that all vocational reports
should be reviewed by all medical-legal evaluators and vice versa, and specifically: “It is uncontroverted that
many evaluating physicians routinely describe and consider a significant array of vocational evidence in the
preparation of their reporting,” citing 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10682(b)(8), which includes consideration of a history
of the alleged industrial injury, the patient’s complaints, and an opinion as to the nature, extent, and duration of
disability and work limitations, if any.
The Appeals Board then reiterates the same obligations for medical-legal evaluators also apply to the primary
treating physician under 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 9785. Both types of physicians are obligated to review each other’s
reporting, along with the reporting of all vocational experts. The Appeals Board cites the AMA Guides for the
authority that physicians need to consider vocational factors in arriving at impairment ratings:
In addition to the required consideration of vocational evidence in the preparation of a report, an evaluating
physician may also utilize vocational evidence in the assessment of both impairment and permanent
disability. The AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition (AMA Guides)
observes that, “[p]hysicians with the appropriate skills, training and knowledge may address some of the
implications of the medical impairment toward work disability and future employment.” (AMA Guides, 5th
Ed., § 1.9, at pp. 13-14.) With respect to the broader question of whether a seriously injured worker is able
to reenter the labor market, the AMA Guides observe, “[a] decision of this scope usually requires input from
medical and nonmedical experts, such as vocational specialists, and the evaluation of both stable and
changing factors, such as the person’s education, skills, and motivation, the state of the job market, and
local economic consideration.” (Id. at p. 14.) Additionally, where an evaluating physician is tasked with
describing impairment pursuant to the AMA Guides, vocational evidence may assist the physician in
determining which of the chapters, tables, or methods from within the four corners of the AMA Guides will
provide the most accurate assessment of the injured worker’s impairment. (Almaraz v. Environmental
Recovery Services/Guzman v. Milpitas Unified School District (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (Appeals
Board en banc), as affirmed by Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman)
(2010) 187 Cal.App.4th 808 [75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837].)…
In short, as is demonstrated above, treating and evaluating physicians regularly review, assess, and opine
on vocational issues, from the gathering of vocational information relevant to the determination of
causation, to the final assessment of permanent disability and work restrictions. We therefore find no merit
in applicant’s contention that evaluating physicians are ill-equipped and unwilling to assess vocational
evidence. To the contrary, we believe that vocational evidence is an important, and often integral,
consideration in the preparation of medical-legal reporting, and that is fully within the purview of the
evaluating physician to offer an opinion responsive to the vocational evidence either at the request of the
parties, or of the physician’s own accord.
The Appeals Board also addresses in Nunes II a vexing problem that trial judges experience all the time—when
one evaluating physician adopts another evaluating physician’s conclusions on apportionment of permanent
disability, without stating how and why they are adopting the other physician’s conclusions. The Appeals Board
states:
While we agree generally that it is impermissible for an evaluating physician to merely reiterate another
physician’s apportionment analysis without an accompanying explanation of “how and why” the conditions
Page 27 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
or factors of apportionment result in permanent disability, these concerns would necessarily be limited to
physicians who are statutorily authorized to render an apportionment opinion under section 4663. (See,
e.g. Mayorga v. Dexter Axle Chassis Group (June 25, 2015, ADJ364166; ADJ3925942) [2015 Cal. Wrk.
Comp. P.D. LEXIS 359].) There can be no “pass-through” apportionment from a physician to a vocational
expert when that expert is not authorized to render an apportionment determination in the first instance.
The Nunes cases serve as a guideline for counsel to develop the record on cases involving the potential of a
100% permanent and total disability award with or without apportionment of permanent disability to non-
industrial factors. The many takeaway factors in this case will be used to teach attorneys, physicians, and
vocational experts the standards of proof and the substantive information that needs to be adduced and
produced by these experts so that a trial judge, the Appeals Board, and appellate courts can rely on their
conclusions as substantial medical and vocational evidence to support an award.
[7] Payments of Permanent Disability
When are payments of permanent disability made? Payment of permanent disability starting on or after
1/1/2013 depends on whether the injured employee is working when his or her condition is declared MMI and
he or she has permanent partial disability. New Labor Code § 4650(b)(2) states:
(2) Prior to an award of permanent disability indemnity, a permanent disability indemnity payment shall not
be required if the employer has offered the employee a position that pays at least 85 percent of the
wages and compensation paid to the employee at the time of injury or if the employee is employed in a
position that pays at least 100 percent of the wages and compensation paid to the employee at the
time of injury, provided that when an award of permanent disability indemnity is made, the amount then
due shall be calculated from the last date for which temporary disability indemnity was paid, or the date
the employee’s disability became permanent and stationary, whichever is earlier.
So if the injured employee has been offered a position for the same employer that pays at least 85% of his or
her earnings at the time of injury or if the injured employee is working for and is earning at least 100% of his or
her earnings at the time of injury, there will be no permanent disability advances until there is a final stipulated
award or findings and award. Once an award has issued, permanent disability will be paid retroactively from
when the last payment of TTD was paid or when the injured employee was first declared permanent and
stationary by any doctor, whichever is earlier.
This section applies regardless of the date of injury, as long as the injured employee is working at the same
employer at 85% wages or at least 100% wages for any employer as of the date of injury when his or her
condition is declared MMI on or after 1/1/2013.
This raises some interesting questions: How are attorney’s fees paid when the injured worker has had to wait
for a Stipulated Award or Findings and Award? Is an injured worker entitled to permanent disability advances if
there had been economic hardship due to the injury despite his or her returning to work at 85% to 100%
earnings at the time of injury?
Some defense attorneys used to advise claims adjusters against commuting attorney’s fees from the far end of
an award if there is sufficient accrued permanent disability indemnity to pay the fees. Labor Code § 4650(b)(2)
seems to create a retroactive sum of permanent disability indemnity from which attorney’s fees may be paid,
unlike existing law where accrued PD benefits are rare. Applicants’ attorneys like when the injured worker
receives a lump sum from accrued benefits with attorney’s fees commuted from the far end of the award and
later the injured worker receives some bi-weekly payments of permanent disability rather than piecemeal
payments overall for years. This may change when there is a large amount of accrued permanent disability and
the injured worker is working at the same or better wages at the time of MMI than what he or she earned at the
time of injury. Remember, there is a 3% discount per year of any permanent disability benefits that are
commuted from the far end of an award, be it permanent disability payments or attorney’s fees thereon.
We believe everyone involved should be sympathetic to injured workers who lose significant income after an
injury, the 104 weeks of TTD have been paid, with no income thereafter, and then an eventual return to work at
the same or better wages at MMI. There should be some voluntary payments of permanent disability advances
in these types of cases.
Page 28 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
[8] No Change in Number of Weeks of Payments of Permanent Disability
At the time of her untimely death in 2010, Carrie Nevans was the Administrative Director of the Division of
Workers’ Compensation. At a previous State Bar meeting she was informally discussing changing the 2005
PDRS as had been mandated to be done every five years and was due to be done by December 2010, which
never occurred. But during the meeting she mentioned that perhaps permanent disability should be increased
by increasing the number of weeks instead of increasing the weekly rates of payments.
In the 2005 PDRS, for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2005, the number of weeks of payments of permanent
disability increased dramatically over the number of weeks of payments for injuries occurring prior to 1/1/2005.
For example, for every percentage of permanent disability over 70%, there is an increase of 16 weeks of
payments of permanent disability indemnity [see Lab. Code §§ 4658(a)–(c)].
In contrast, under SB 863, the number of weeks of payments of permanent disability for each percentage of
permanent partial disability is paid at the same number of weeks as for injuries that occurred between 1/1/2005
and 12/31/2012. So there is no change in the number of weeks of payments for each percentage of permanent
disability.
Instead, as discussed below, there are two thresholds of increases of the amount of payments per week for
injuries occurring between 1/1/2013 and 12/31/2013 and an overall increase in the amount of payments for all
permanent disability ratings for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2014. So this is how the money payments differ
between dates of injury prior to 1/1/2013 and thereafter:
•
PD weekly rates have increased but not the number of weeks of payments:
•
2006–2012 rates:
1–69% = $230.00 per week max
70–99% = $270.00 per week max
•
2013 rates:
1–54% PD = $230.00/wk max
55%–69% PD = $270.00/wk max
70%–99% PD = $290.00/wk max
Lab. Code § 4453(b)(8)
•
2014 rates:
1–99% PD = $290.00/wk max
Lab. Code § 4453(b)(9)
A 55-year-old journeyman electrician, who has a DRE Category IV 28% WPI cervical spine impairment (Table
15-5, page 392) for a 2012, 2013 or 2014 date of injury, rates as follows:
2012 DOI:
15.01.01.00 − 28 − [5] 36 − 380H − 42 − 48%
 48% PD = 257 WEEKS AT $230.00 = $59,110.00
2013 DOI:
15.01.01.00 − 28 [28 × 1.4] 39 − 380H − 45 − 51%
 51% PD = 279.25 WEEKS AT $230.00 = $64,227.50
2014 DOI:
SAME AS 2013 (pending new PDRS for age and occupation)
 51% PD = 279.25 WEEKS AT $290.00 = $80,982.50
If a final PD rating was 60% after adjustment for age, occupation, DFEC or adjustment factor, the money would
be quite different:
If 2012 DOI: 60% PD = 351.25 weeks at $230.00 = $80,787.50
If 2013 DOI: 60% PD = 351.25 weeks at $270.00 = $94,837.50
If 2014 DOI: 60% PD = 351.25 weeks at $290.00 = $101,862.50
So you can see the increase in money that occurs with 55% permanent disability being a new threshold for an
increase in weekly payment rates along with ratings between 70% and 99% as has always been the case under
the 2005 PDRS and prior schedules.
[9] The 15% Bump-Up and Bump-Down
Is there still the 15% “bump-up” and 15% “bump-down” if the employer does or does not offer regular, modified
or alternative work within 60 days of the determination of permanent disability? The answer is that this has
been repealed for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013. There is no longer any 15% increase or decrease for
injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013.
Page 29 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
For injuries occurring between 1/1/2005 and 12/31/2012, Labor Code §§ 4658(d)(2) and (3) have been modified
to require the 15% bump-up or bump-down of permanent disability payments. The 60-day time determination
begins when the injured employee is first declared permanent and stationary rather than when there is an
award of permanent disability. The “bump-up” occurs if there is no offer of regular, modified or alternative work
within 60 days of a permanent and stationary date and if the employer has over 50 employees. The “bump-
down” occurs if the employer offers and the employee accepts or rejects regular, modified or alternative work,
regardless of the number of employees.
[10] Supplemental Job Displacement Benefits
Labor Code § 4658.5 was amended and applies to injuries occurring between 1/1/2004 (where the 2005 PDRS
applies and none of the exceptions of Labor Code § 4660(d) applies) and before 1/1/2013 and requires the
sliding scale voucher to be given to the injured employee “within 60 days of termination of temporary total
disability.” The sliding scale amounts of the voucher ($4,000.00, $6,000.00, $8,000.00, or $10,000.00,
depending on the level of permanent disability) still applies to injuries occurring between 1/1/2004 and
12/31/2012. This means that the 60 days starts to accrue when the first doctor declares the injured worker MMI
and indicates the injured worker has restrictions and permanent partial disability. The first physician can be a
treating physician, PQME or AME. You no longer have to wait for an “award” for the SJDB to begin the 60-day
period for the employer to offer regular, modified or alternative work.
So what happens when a treating physician’s report rates 15% permanent disability and an AME or PQME
report later rates 30% permanent disability? It appears that the voucher may have to increase in value? This
remains to be seen as case law will have to develop on that issue for injuries prior to 1/1/2013 when the
voucher system applies.
Labor Code § 4658.5(d) indicates that a voucher that is issued on or after 1/1/2013 expires after two years or
five years from the date of injury, whichever is later. This is true regardless of the date of injury, as long as the
voucher is issued on or after 1/1/2013. The injured worker has to use it or lose it within two years of receiving
the voucher or five years from the date of injury, whichever is later. The injured worker has to submit
reimbursement claims for these expenses prior to the expiration of the voucher. Section 4658.6 indicates that
there is no voucher if the employer offers the employee regular, modified or alternative work within 30 days of
the termination of TTD payments.
For injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, Labor Code § 4658.7 mandates that a $6,000.00 job displacement
voucher be provided to the injured employee if he or she is not offered regular, modified or alternative work
within 60 days after receipt by the claims administrator of the first report from either a PTP, PQME, or AME who
says the injured employee is permanent and stationary and has permanent partial disability. The voucher is to
be provided to the injured worker within 20 days of the expiration of time for the employer to offer a job. The
injured worker is allowed an unrestricted “advance” of $500.00 to be included in the voucher. Settlement or
commutation of the voucher is not permitted under new section 4658.7(g).
Labor Code § 4658.7 also mandates that the doctor comments in a form prescribed by the Administrative
Director to be sent to the employer of the injured employee’s “work capacities and of activity restrictions
resulting from the injury that are relevant to potential regular work, modified work, or alternative work.”
This is an extremely important component of SB 863 in that it forces all employers to have a meaningful
interactive process with the injured employee in accordance with other state and federal laws, including the
Americans with Disabilities Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA). Labor Code
§§ 4658.7(b)(1)(A) and (B) state as follows:
(A) If the employer or claims administrator has provided the physician with a job description of the
employee’s regular work, proposed modified work, or proposed alternative work, the physician shall
evaluate and describe in the form whether the work capacities and activity restrictions are compatible
with the physical requirements set forth in that job description.
(B) The claims administrator shall forward the form to the employer for the purpose of fully informing the
employer of work capacities and activity restrictions resulting from the injury that are relevant to
potential regular, modified, or alternative work.
Labor Code § 4658.7(h) mandates:
Page 30 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
(h) The administrative director shall adopt regulations for the administration of this section, including, but
not limited to, both of the following:
(1) The time, manner, and content of notices of rights under this section.
(2) The form of a mandatory attachment to a medical report to be forwarded to the employer pursuant
to paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) for the purpose of fully informing the employer of work
capacities and of activity restrictions resulting from the injury that are relevant to potential regular
work, modified work, or alternative work.
If you are a defense attorney, you need to appropriately advise your client and probably both the claims
administrator and the employer that there are significant legal implications and potential consequences for the
employer to properly respond to the physician’s final report when this new form is sent to everyone. The idea of
this system of workers’ compensation is to get injured workers back to work as soon as possible and as safely
as possible. Despite the existence of many skeptical and cynical participants in our workers’ compensation
system, it has been our experience that most legitimately injured workers want to return to work, in spite of
having permanent objective medical evidence of pain, suffering and limitations of activities. In reality, anyone
who has ratable impairment under the AMA Guides is limited in activities of daily living as a matter of law, fact,
and definition.
[11] “Return to Work” Fund
[a] Background and Purpose
As part of the comprehensive workers' compensation reform in SB 863 that was signed into law by
Governor Edmund G. Brown on September 18, 2012, the legislature passed a provision in Labor Code
§ 139.48 that provides an annual fund of $120,000,000.00 from which eligible injured workers may receive
money that compensates them in cases where there is a disproportional difference between their
permanent disability ratings and their loss of future earning capacity. How is this fund going to be
established, who pays for it, who administers it, how will it be implemented, and what role, if any, will
attorneys have in representing or defending claims for these benefits? In 2013, the legislature passed and
Governor Edmund G. Brown signed into law SB 71, which amended Labor Code § 138.48 to indicate that
the provisions of the Return to Work Fund apply to dates of injury on or after 1/1/13.
In order to understand the new law, you must deconstruct the new section and determine the “clear
meaning” of the statute. Benefits under section 139.48 will be called the “Return To Work Fund,” or “RTWF
benefits,” or “RTWF supplemental payments.” Here is what the statute actually says:
139.48. There shall be in the department a return-to-work program administered by the director, funded
by one hundred twenty million dollars ($120,000,000) annually derived from non-General Funds of the
Workers’ Compensation Administration Revolving Fund, Eligibility for payments and the amount of
payments shall be determined by regulations adopted by the director, based on findings from studies
conducted by the director in consultation with the Commission on Health and Safety and Workers’
Compensation. Determinations of the director shall be subject to review at the trial level of the appeals
board upon the same grounds as prescribed for petitions for reconsideration.
Let’s look at each meaningful sentence in the statute and deconstruct it:
There shall be in the department a return-to-work program administered by the director, funded by one
hundred twenty million dollars ($120,000,000) annually derived from non-General Funds of the
Workers’ Compensation Administration Revolving Fund …
What is known is that the statute’s reference to the phrase “administered by the director” means the
Director of the Department of Industrial Relations (DIR) (currently a vacant position, previously Christine
Baker), and not the Administrative Director (AD) of the Division of Workers’ Compensation (DWC), who is
currently George Parisotto.
The Workers’ Compensation Administration Revolving Fund is the formal reference to the fact that the
administration of the state’s workers’ compensation system is 100% user funded, i.e., paid for by annual
Page 31 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
surcharges on workers’ compensation insurance premiums from employers. The Return To Work Fund will
be a segregated account from the general funds that are earmarked for running the rest of the workers’
compensation system under the DWC. However, the RTWF will also be funded by employer premiums but
the benefits will not be paid by insurance companies to injured workers.
Eligibility for payments and the amount of payments shall be determined by regulations adopted by the
director …
Eligibility for RTWF benefits will be determined under the auspices of Christine Baker, the Director of the
Department of Industrial Relations (DIR), and not the Administrative Director of the Division of Workers’
Compensation. This is not a distinction without a difference—the DIR is the umbrella agency that is under
the cabinet level Department of Labor and Workforce Development. The Division of Workers’
Compensation is under the DIR as one of the sub-agencies of the DIR.
A very important point is necessary—the claims examiner for the claims administrator for the employer will
have nothing to do with determining eligibility for Return To Work Fund benefits. These claims will be solely
between the injured worker and the State of California DIR claims administrator. Attorneys who represent
injured workers must make it clear to the injured worker that eligibility for these benefits are determined by
a state agency and have nothing to do with the insurance company or claims adjuster in the workers’
compensation case in chief against the employer. In fact, depending on the regulations for implementation,
applicant’s attorneys may not be involved in the initial process for applying for RTWF benefits but only on
appeals of denials of those benefits in accordance with the statute.
It was originally thought that the claims examiners who adjust claims for the Uninsured Employer Benefits
Trust Fund and Subsequent Injuries Benefits Trust Fund would have the additional duties to adjust Return
To Work Fund benefits. However, that turns out not to be true. Eligibility for Return To Work Fund benefits
are under the direction and control of the DIR and not the UEBTF/SIBTF, which is part of the DWC.
The Department of Industrial Relations promulgated regulations effective 4/13/2015 that implement the
Return-to-Work Supplement Program for injured workers whose employers do not offer them continued
employment after the injury at approximately the same pre-injury income levels [see 8 Cal. Code Reg.
§§ 17300–17310]. The amount of the supplement available to a qualifying injured worker is $5,000 [see 8
Cal. Code Reg. § 17308].
[b] 2013 RAND Study of Permanent Disability to Disproportional Wage Loss
[i] Working Paper
Preliminary data necessary to implement the RTWF benefits were published by RAND and released to
the public in August 2013. The RAND Center for Health and Safety In The Workplace issued its
“Working Paper” report “Identifying Permanently Disabled Workers With Disproportionate Earnings
Losses for Supplemental Payments” authored by Seth A. Seabury and Ethan Scherer. The study is
being funded by the State of California (CHS&WC).
A “working paper” is from the research community and refers to a researcher's latest findings and
solicits informal peer review. Working papers are citable as authority prior to a formal peer-reviewed
publication but must be referred to in any citation as a “working paper.” The Return to Work Fund
Benefits mandated by Labor Code § 139.48 is referred to in the 2013 RAND study as “supplemental
payments.” The 2013 RAND study has not been updated since 2013 since there has been minimal
political pressure to raise permanent disability indemnity benefits. However, the 2013 study should be
mentioned a number of years later to show counsel how the current PDRS for injuries occurring on or
after 1/1/2013 was derived based on EDD data of earnings loss of injured workers compared to their
cohorts in the same job that were not injured, shown by separate parts of body injured.
[ii] Research Challenges
The RAND researchers and Division of Industrial Relations (DIR) need to resolve what the legislature
intended for the meaning of when permanent disability benefits are “disproportionately low in
Page 32 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
comparison to [injured worker’s] earnings loss.” Specifically, how does one define the term
“disproportionate?” Which injured workers are entitled to supplemental payments from the DIR? How
are pre- and post-injury earnings established? How can the program be implemented so that injured
workers are still motivated to work? Most importantly, how much money should be received by an
injured worker who has a PD rating disproportionately low in comparison to his high loss of earnings
post injury without bankrupting the Return To Work Fund?
An injured worker who seeks RTWF benefits will have the burden of proving a disproportionate
permanent disability award to wage loss in order to qualify for supplemental payments under the RTWF
program. The authors of the RAND study caution that supplemental payments under the RTWF
program should not act as a disincentive for injured workers to return to some kind of work.
[iii] Post-Injury Earnings
The authors of the RAND working paper state on page 4 of their research summary: “The term
‘earnings loss’ as it has been used in prior RAND research refers to the difference between what
someone would have earned in the absence of an injury and the actual, post-injury earnings. The term
‘potential earnings’ has often been used to refer to the earnings an injured worker would have earned
had no injury occurred.” This means that potential earnings cannot be actually measured; it has to be
estimated.
The authors also state on page 4: “Past RAND work has estimated potential earnings using the
measured earnings of uninjured, matched ‘control’ workers, and subtracted the injured workers’
measured post-injury earnings to estimate earnings loss. However, this approach is only valid
statistically when applied to large samples of injured workers—there is no practical method to estimate
the true earnings losses for any individual person.”
As is usually the case with statistics, (a statistics professor once said: “There are five kinds of lies—fibs,
excuses, lies, damn lies, and statistics”) each individual is different from the average. The authors of
the RAND study caution on page 5: “On average, comparing the earnings of a randomly selected
person who is working today to their earnings several years later will show they have higher earnings
today (because factors such as retirement, unemployment, or dropping out of the labor force tend to
dominate an average). Thus we expect that comparing pre-injury and post-injury earnings will tend to
overestimate earnings losses on average.” This finding may help the DIR decide whether payments of
permanent disability from a Findings and Award, Stipulated Award or a compromise and release would
count towards “potential future earnings,” which would reduce the number of eligible injured workers to
receive supplemental payments. The authors do not comment on the issue of whether social security
disability or retirement benefits count towards future earnings either. Both factors (a workers’
compensation case settlement or receipt of social security benefits) would reduce eligibility numbers,
which may free more money from the RTWF resources.
[iv] Post Injury Time Period and Supplemental Job Displacement Benefits
The authors of the 2013 RAND working paper point out that in other RAND studies, it takes between 3–
5 years after the date of injury for earnings losses to stabilize. The authors conclude that a useful
eligibility requirement will be to peg eligibility to the offer of return to work by the at-injury employer, as
is required under the existing Supplemental Job Displacement Benefits pursuant to Labor Code § 4658.
Prior RAND studies have shown that replacement of lost earnings in California is lowest for workers
with the lowest permanent disability ratings. In other words, people with low PD ratings lose the most
earnings three years after a date of injury. Basing the RTWF supplemental payments according to the
difference between actual earnings loss and expected earnings loss could help address the inequity
between a low PD rating and high actual loss of earnings. So the size of the supplemental payment
would on average be inversely proportional to the PD rating. The authors point out that the number of
eligible beneficiaries for the RTWF is totally unknown and unpredictable. They strongly recommend that
supplemental payments under the RTWF program be contingent on injured workers getting an SJDB
voucher.
Page 33 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
For example, from the RAND research described below, injured workers with a 4% permanent disability
rating loses an average of 31% of his or her earnings over a four-year period after the date of injury. If a
specific injured worker has a greater than 31% loss of earnings over the four years after a date of
injury, then he or she would be entitled to RTWF supplemental payments.
[v] Study Methods
The authors of the 2013 RAND working paper used DEU permanent disability ratings and EDD wage
data for injured workers who had earnings information for 4 years from the date of injury and for injured
workers age 18 to 64. The PD ratings were adjusted for age, occupation, and apportionment but not
with DFEC adjustments. This is because since the RTWF program only applies to dates of injury on or
after 1/1/13, the DFEC adjustment no longer exists. The authors also used WCIRB data to track injured
workers who had no PD but were paid some TTD benefits. Remember, WCIRB data does not include
public entity or self-insured employers.
The data was adjusted to account for situations where an injured worker’s pre-injury earnings and injury
severity by PD ratings were for workers who were in lower paying jobs and who generally have more
severe injuries on average. The authors adjusted such factors as age, occupation, employer size,
industry, region of the state, part of body injured, multiple parts of body injured and adjusted earnings
so that one can imagine the same person applying across PD ratings. Also, the authors assumed that
all dollar values for the pre- and post-injury earnings are based on 2011 dollars in accordance with CPI
and US Bureau of Labor Statistics standards.
The authors made the following assumptions in order to model program eligibility and cost:
• Fixed annual program budget of $120 million per statute.
• All $120 million of the remaining amount will be spent.
• Approximately 60,000 permanent partial disability cases per year.
[vi] Preliminary Findings
The authors of the RAND working paper made these preliminary findings:
• Total number of injured workers studied was 19,709.
• The vast majority of those studied had PD ratings of under 34%.
• Only 284 injured workers out of 19,709 studied had PD ratings between 70% and 99% (life
pension cases).
• 57.3% of the total number of injured workers were not working at the at-injury employer 9 quarters
(two years, three months) from the dates of injury.
• 20.2% of the total number of injured workers studied received SJDB.
• 48% of injured workers studied had less than 15% adjusted permanent disability ratings.
• 57% of injured workers are not employed by the 3rd year after the date of injury.
• But 23% of uninjured matched control workers are also not employed with the at-injury employers
after 3 years!
• 20% of permanent partially disabled workers receive the SJDB with lower percentages for low PD
ratings and 40–50% of workers with severe injuries.
• Vocational rehabilitation had a 40% utilization rate, which is double of those who receive SJDB
because injured workers were paid to participate in VR.
• Authors predict up to 40% of injured workers who qualify for SJDB will be eligible for RTWF
supplemental payments.
Page 34 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
• 45% of injured workers who have PD ratings of under 9% are not working at the at-injury
employer 9 quarters (2 years and three months) after the date of injury.
• 52% of injured workers who have PD ratings of between 10% and 14% are no longer working at
the at-injury employer after 9 quarters from the date of injury.
• 62% of injured workers who have a PD rating of 20% are not working at the at-injury employer
after 9 quarters.
• 67% of injured workers who have a PD rating of 30% are not working at the at-injury employer
after 9 quarters.
• Workers with PD ratings from 1% to 4% have average earnings loss of 31% at 4 years after their
dates of injury.
• Workers with PD ratings from 5% to 9% have average earnings loss of 34% at 4 years after their
dates of injury.
• Workers with PD ratings from 10% to 14% have average earnings loss of 37% at 4 years after
their dates of injury.
• Workers with PD ratings from 20% to 24% have average earnings loss of 44%.
• Workers with PD ratings from 25% to 29% have average earnings loss of 47%.
• Workers with PD ratings from 30% to 34% have average earnings loss of 50%.
• Interestingly 15% of the matched control group of uninjured workers had earnings loss of 15%
over the 4 years from the same dates of injury as injured workers accounted for by attrition in
EDD data on those workers such as retirement or dropping off EDD payroll deductions.
• All workers studied had a 42% average earnings loss during the four years after the date of injury.
What does all of this preliminary data mean? First of all, the sample size for severely injured workers is
too low (only 1.44% of the entire sample!). However, it is clear as has been obvious to attorneys who
represent injured workers is that California has a woefully poor return to work rate for injured workers.
As a result, loss of future earnings is a real and fairly quantifiable reality for a large portion of injured
workers.
[vii] Determination of Eligibility for RTWF Supplemental Payments
The authors of the 2013 RAND working paper point out that the DIR has to make policy decisions in
how Labor Code § 139.48 will be implemented. The authors suggest that some of the following
considerations prevail in determining eligibility:
Only $120 million is available every year. If there are 60,000 PPD cases per year, and if 40% of those
injured workers qualify for SJDB, then up to 24,000 injured workers per year may qualify for RTWF
supplemental payments. If that is true, then the average amount of money paid would be about
$5,000.00 per injured worker! Here is what the authors conclude on page 16 of the Working Paper:
“Given the fixed budget, there is an obvious tradeoff between more generous eligibility criteria that
provides benefits to more people, or more restrictive eligibility criteria that leads to higher benefits per
person. In the table [Table 5 of the study], the number of expected recipients ranges from 10,290 to
24,240, while the average payment [of RTWF supplemental payments] ranges from $4,950.00 to
$11,662.00.”
As you can see, $120 million does not go that far when up to 24,000 people may qualify for a portion of
that amount per year. It is clear that the DIR will have to cap RWTF supplemental payments to under a
threshold amount while increasing the definition of earnings loss to probably include consideration of
PD payments, work income, social security disability payments, and possibly other sources of income
over a 4 year post-injury period. The authors remain silent on whether the DIR will require injured
workers to prove actual earnings for each year of 4 years post injury or whether a statistical estimate of
earnings loss based on this type of data from RAND will suffice.
Page 35 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
[viii] Appeals of DIR Determinations on Eligibility
Labor Code § 139.48 also states in pertinent part:
Determinations of the director shall be subject to review at the trial level of the appeals board upon
the same grounds as prescribed for petitions for reconsideration.
This provision looks like at some point, an injured worker may be represented by his or her attorney
who appeals a determination of the Director of the DIR before a trial judge of the WCAB. Although the
statute does not say the attorney who assists an injured worker in obtaining RTWF benefits is entitled
to an award of attorneys fees, the fact that an appeal is taken to a trial judge implies that fees will be
allowed.
You might recall under the prior vocational rehabilitation statute, Labor Code § 139.5, attorney’s fees
were allowed not under that section but under a regulation from Title 8 of the California Code of
Regulations. The same process may occur under section 139.48 RTWF benefits that are appealed to a
WCJ. It is even possible that attorney’s fees will be allowed simply for an attorney assisting an injured
worker in applying for RTWF benefits in the first place. This is why close attention has to be made to
the regulatory development for RTWF benefits.
Remember, the grounds for an appeal by way of a Petition for Reconsideration are governed by Labor
Code § 5903, which states in pertinent part:
(a) That by the order, decision, or award made and filed by the appeals board or the workers’
compensation judge, the appeals board acted without or in excess of its powers.
(b) That the order, decision, or award was procured by fraud.
(c) That the evidence does not justify the findings of fact.
(d) That the petitioner has discovered new evidence material to him or her, which he or she could
not, with reasonable diligence, have discovered and produced at the hearing.
(e) That the findings of fact do not support the order, decision, or award.
Nothing contained in this section shall limit the grant of continuing jurisdiction contained in Sections
5803 to 5805, inclusive.
It appears that appeals of an “eligibility award” from the DIR to a WCAB trial judge would fall most likely
under sub-sections 5903(c), (d), or (e). Hypothetically, an injured worker who appeals a determination
of eligibility of RTWF benefits to a WCJ would seem to be entitled to a trial de novo on entitlement if the
grounds for an appeal was because the decision, order or the award of the Director of the DIR was not
supported by substantial evidence or the evidence did not support her “order, decision or award.”
[ix] Other Issues to Resolve
What happens if the injured worker also files a Petition to Reopen his claim against the employer for
new and further permanent disability within five years of his date of injury. Can he or she also file a
claim for RTWF benefits? Probably not since a new and further permanent disability rating may
eliminate any disproportionate loss of future earnings, making application for RTWF benefits moot.
Regulations may allow an injured worker to file for RTWF benefits concurrently with a Petition To
Reopen with proceedings in the RTWF claim stayed pending the final outcome of the Petition to
Reopen.
How will RTWF benefits be paid to the injured worker? Weekly, monthly, or paid in one lump sum?
Who will defend the DIR in legal proceedings if an eligibility determination by a claims examiner for the
DIR is appealed by an injured worker to a WCAB trial judge?
Will RTWF benefits be considered to be taxable earnings?
These and many other questions will be answered by the regulatory authority granted in the statute to
the DIR. In the coming months all of us must pay attention to that process. Go to www.dir.ca.gov/dwc
Page 36 of 36
§ 5.01 Introduction
and click on SB 863, which will lead you to all of the essential aspects of SB 863 including the bill itself
and the proposed regulations. The entire workers’ compensation community is encouraged to become
part of the process and to participate in the rule making public forums that are announced on the DIR
and DWC websites for all proposed regulations that implement SB 863.
[12] How to Do Ratings Under 2005 and 2013 PDRS
The following examples in § 5.02, below, are intended to provide guidance on how the AMA Guides apply in
real cases and how the 2005 and 2013 Permanent Disability Rating Schedules apply. The main purpose of this
chapter is to show you how each PDRS works. Many physicians do not understand what happens to the whole
person impairment ratings they come up with in their medical reports. This chapter explains to everyone how
“raw” WPI ratings are converted into permanent disability ratings. The impairment ratings are given as based
upon a “strict” reading of the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides 5th Edition. For a discussion
on how to rebut a strict WPI rating under the AMA Guides, see Chapter 7 of this guidebook.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 5.02
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 5
Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
§ 5.02 Example 1: More Than One Body Part Injured in One Injury
The following example involves an injured worker who has more than one body part injured in one injury and who
has functionally recovered well from two surgeries:
A 45-year-old nurse injures her right knee and low back when she slips and falls. An AME opines she is permanent
and stationary and reached Maximum Medical Improvement (MMI) (functionally stable for the next year with or
without medical treatment) and is status post right partial medial meniscectomy, with no residuals, and a herniated
L4-L5 disc with a one level laminectomy/discectomy, without residual radiculopathy. The doctor indicates she has a
Diagnosis Based Evaluation (DBE) 1% WPI for the right knee (AMA Guides Chapter 17, Table 17-33), and a
Diagnosis Related Estimate (DRE) Category III lumbar spine WPI of 10% (AMA Guides Chapter 15, Table 15-5). In
this example, the injured applicant had a very good result from both surgeries with the assumption that she has
little, if any, loss of function. The WPI may be increased if the AME used the wrong method of testing for WPI, for
example, if the AME should have used the Range of Motion (ROM) or functional loss methods instead of the
Diagnosis Based Evaluation (DBE) for the right knee.
Under the 2005 PDRS:
The rating for the knee is as follows:
17.05.10.04 - 1 - [2] - 1 - 311F - 1 - 1% PD
 Section 2 WPI FEC OCC AGE
The rating for the back is as follows:
15.03.02.02 - 10 - [5]13 - 311G - 15 - 16% PD
 Section 2 WPI FEC OCC AGE
The first number after the part of body codes is the WPI standard based upon the AME’s report. The second
number after the WPI is the FEC adjustment and is derived from the FEC adjustment table on page 2-6 of the 2005
PDRS.
The formula for combining the permanent disability is based upon the Combined Values Chart at the end of the
2005 PDRS and is based upon a + b(1.0 − a). In the example:
.16 + .01(1.00 − .16)
.16 + .01(.84)
.16 + .0084 = .1684 = .17 × 100 = 17%
This nurse has a combined permanent disability to her right knee and low back of 17% under the 2005 PDRS.
The Combined Values Chart saves you the trouble of having to apply the mathematical formula to establish a final
rating. Remember, you only combine ratings of permanent disability and not impairment ratings.
Page 2 of 3
§ 5.02 Example 1: More Than One Body Part Injured in One Injury
When combining multiple body parts, use the above formula of the Combined Values Chart at the end of the 2005
PDRS. The 2005 PDRS requires that the highest two permanent disability ratings be combined. You then take the
next highest permanent disability rating and combine it with the prior combination and so on. The combined rating
for an extremity after adjustments for FEC, occupation, and age cannot exceed the amputation value of the
extremity (60% WPI for an upper extremity amputation, 40% WPI for a lower extremity amputation). See AMA
Guides Chapters 16 and 17, respectively.
If this injury had occurred on or after 1/1/2013, the ratings would be as indicated below. Using the 2005 PDRS, you
refer first to Section 2, pages 2-2 through 2-5 to get the impairment number based on the WPI part of body injured,
which is derived from the treating or evaluating physician’s report. You skip the rest of Section 2 that relates to an
FEC Rank.
You take each WPI rating for each part of body injured in accordance with the instructions in Section 1 of the 2005
PDRS and then multiply each WPI rating by the “adjustment factor” of 1.4 that is mandated in Labor Code § 4660.1.
You round the WPI × 1.4 to the nearest whole number. This is now the “standard permanent disability rating” that
then needs to be adjusted for the injured worker’s occupation and age at the time of his or her injury.
The next step is to use Section 3, Occupations and Group Numbers on pages 3-1 through 3-37 to determine the
correct occupational group number that most accurately reflects the injured worker’s occupation at the time of his or
her injury.
Then you use Section 4, Occupational Variants on pages 4-1 through 4-9 to determine the adjustment factor from
“C” through “J.”
The next step is to apply the information from the previous steps to Section 5, pages 5-1 through 5-3 to determine
the adjustment for the injured worker’s occupation at the time of injury.
The next step is to utilize Section 6 on pages 6-1 through 6-5 to adjust the rating for the injured worker’s age at the
time of the injury.
The final step is to adjust the permanent disability rating for apportionment based on the treating or evaluating
physician’s conclusions if those conclusions constitute substantial evidence on that issue.
The rating for the knee in Example 1 is as follows:
17.05.10.04 - 1 − (1x 1.4) 1 - 311F - 1 - 1% PD
Section 2 WPI (WPI × 1.4) OCC  AGE
The rating for the back is as follows:
15.03.02.02 - 10 − (10 × 1.4) 14 - 311G - 16 - 17% PD
Section 2 WPI (WPI × 1.4)   OCC    AGE
You would then combine the permanent disability ratings for the knee and back as follows:
17% (back) COMBINED 1% (knee) = 18% final permanent disability rating (“Final PD”). Remember, you only
combine permanent disability ratings if they derive from the same injury.
The 1.4 multiplier is the adjustment factor of 1.4 for every WPI rating, regardless of the part of body injured. So you
do not adjust for FEC or DFEC for any injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013. The “1.4 multiplier” means that each
WPI rating is increased by 40% and then adjusted for occupation and age under the 2005 PDRS charts in section
3.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 3 of 3
§ 5.02 Example 1: More Than One Body Part Injured in One Injury
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 5.03
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 5
Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
§ 5.03 Example 2: Upper Extremity Injury and Its Sub-Regions
This example demonstrates an injury and rating for an upper extremity and its sub-regions:
A 30-year-old forklift operator injures his right major upper extremity, including his right index finger, ring finger, and
shoulder when his hand got caught between a pallet and the fork of the forklift. Based upon the medical report of an
AME, the applicant has the following impairments:
50% digit impairment due to limited motion of the index finger, 80% digit impairment due to limited motion of the ring
finger, limited motion of right shoulder resulting in a 20% upper extremity impairment (UEI), and right shoulder
instability that equals a 12% upper extremity impairment (UEI).
Step 1: Use protocols in AMA Guides Chapter 16 to determine the combination of finger impairments into one
overall hand impairment. The hand impairment for this example is 18%.
Step 2: Convert the hand impairment to whole person scale using AMA Guides pages 438–439 as follows:
18% Hand impairment × .9 = 16% (UEI)
16% (UEI) × .6 = 10% Whole person impairment (WPI). Note that the fact that this is the applicant’s dominant
hand/arm makes no difference in the rating calculations.
Step 3: Combine the two shoulder impairments using the Combined Values Chart on page 8-1 of the 2005 PDRS:
20% UEI COMBINED 12% UEI = 30% UEI
Step 4: Convert overall shoulder impairment to whole person impairment:
30% UEI × .6 = 18% WPI
Step 5: Apply each section of the 2005 PDRS in the order stated in the instructions beginning of that schedule with
the AMA Guides chapter for parts of body injured and the coding for each body part as follows:
Hand:  16.05.01.00 - 10 - [1]11 - 351G - 13 - 11 PD
Shoulder: 16.02.02.00 - 18 - [7]24 - 351G - 27 - 24 PD
   (AMA code) WPI FEC OCC AGE RATING
The FEC number in brackets is the loss of future earning capacity adjustment for the hand and shoulder,
respectively, as found on page 2-4 of the 2005 PDRS. The number next to the bracket is the adjustment from whole
person impairment to permanent disability as adjusted by the loss of future earnings from the table on page 2-6 of
the 2005 PDRS. The adjustments for occupation and age are the same as in the 1997 Rating Schedule, and the
tables for these are included in the 2005 PDRS.
In this example, a forklift operator is an occupational group 351, and the occupational variant for the hand and
shoulder injuries is a G. The applicant is 30 years old on the date of injury, so the permanent disability rating is
reduced since he is less than 38 years of age on the date of injury. In both the 1997 and 2005 rating schedules, the
Page 2 of 2
§ 5.03 Example 2: Upper Extremity Injury and Its Sub-Regions
adjustment for age reduces a permanent disability if the injured employee is younger than 38, and the adjustment
for age increases a permanent disability if the injured employee is older than 41.
Step 6: Combine the adjusted ratings for hand and shoulder to obtain the final disability rating:
24% PD COMBINED 11% PD = 32% PD
The final overall permanent disability in this example is 32% after adjustment for loss of future earning capacity,
age, and occupation.
Under the 2013 PDRS, if this injury occurred on or after 1/1/2013, the rating would look like this:
Hand:  16.05.01.00 - 10 − (10 x 1.4) 14 - 351G - 16 − 14% PD
Shoulder: 16.02.02.00 - 18 − (18 x 1.4) 25 - 351G - 28 − 26% PD
   (AMA code)  WPI  (WPIx1.4)  OCC AGE RATING
26% (shoulder) COMBINED 14 (hand) = 36% Final PD
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 5.04
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 5
Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
§ 5.04 Example 3: More Than One Body Part Injured in More Than One Injury
The following example involves an injured worker who has more than one body part injured in more than one injury:
A 58-year-old film technician injures his lumbar spine when he accidentally drops a heavy film canister on his foot,
and wrenches his back as a startle response. In addition, he claims cumulative trauma to his heart and aggravation
of diabetes due to stress and strain. He has coronary bypass graft surgery with some residual exertional effects on
his activities of daily living (ADLs). His diabetes has existed since age 18, but has progressed to include retinopathy
and diabetic peripheral neuropathies.
An AME opines the applicant is permanent and stationary and reached Maximum Medical Improvement (MMI)
(functionally stable for the next year with or without medical treatment) and is status post L5-S1 laminectomy and
discectomy with residual right lower extremity radiculopathy. The doctor indicates the applicant has a Diagnosis
Based Estimate (DRE) Category III lumbar spine WPI of 13% (AMA Guides Chapter 15, Table 15-3). In this
example, the applicant had a fair result from back surgery with the assumption that he has some loss of function.
NOTE:
The WPI may be increased if the AME used the wrong method of testing for WPI, for example, if the AME
should have used the Range of Motion (ROM) or functional loss methods instead of the Diagnosis Based
Estimate (DBE) for the lumbar spine. ■
The internal medicine AME opines that the applicant is MMI for his cardiac and diabetic conditions. He concludes
that the applicant has a Class III impairment for diabetes (AMA Guides Chapter 10, Table 10-8, page 231) of 20%
WPI, which is the high end of Class III since the patient has the diabetic retinopathy and peripheral neuropathies.
The AME also concludes that the applicant has a Class II impairment of his heart (AMA Guides Chapter 3, Table 3-
6a, page 36) of 15% WPI, which is the mid range of Class II since the patient has average exertional abilities after
his heart by-pass surgery.
The orthopedic AME opines that there is no apportionment for the lumbar spine impairment, but the internist opines
that 50% of the applicant’s heart and diabetic conditions are non-industrial and 50% are due to the stress and strain
of his employment over the continuous trauma period.
The rating for the back is as follows:
15.03.01.02 - 13 - [5] 17 - 230E - 15 - 19%
Section 2 WPI FEC OCC AGE PD
The rating for the heart is as follows:
03.02.00.00 - 15 - [5] 19 - 230E - 17 - 21%
Section 2 WPI FEC OCC AGE PD
Page 2 of 4
§ 5.04 Example 3: More Than One Body Part Injured in More Than One Injury
The rating for the diabetes is:
10.01.00.00 - 20 - [2] 23 - 230F - 23 - 29%
Section 2 WPI FEC OCC AGE PD
The first number after the part of body codes is the WPI standard based upon the AME’s report. The second
number after the WPI is the FEC adjustment and is derived from the FEC adjustment table on page 2-6 of the 2005
PDRS.
The formula for combining the permanent disability is based upon the Combined Values Chart at the end of the
2005 PDRS and is based upon a + b(1.0 − a). In the example, you must combine the two highest permanent
disability ratings and then combine the next highest rating. The symbol C is used to show two numbers are to be
combined using the combined values chart in the 2005 PDRS or at the end of the AMA Guides on page 604. The
following assumes that there is no valid, legal apportionment of permanent disability:
Diabetes 29% C Heart 21%:
.29 + .21(1.00 − .29)
29 + .21(.71)
.29 + .1491 = .4391 = .44 × 100 = 44%
Diabetes/Heart 44% C Back 19%:
.44 + .19(1.00 − .44)
.44 + .19(.56)
.44 + .1064 = .5464 = 55 × 100 = 55%
This applicant has a combined permanent disability to his heart, diabetic condition, and lumbar spine of 55% if there
is no apportionment.
If there is apportionment, the final permanent disability is calculated as follows:
The rating for the back is as follows:
100% (15.03.01.02 - 13 - [5] 17 - 230E - 15 − 19) = 19%
Section 2    WPI  FEC OCC AGE PD
The rating for the heart is as follows:
50% (03.02.00.00 - 15 - [5] 19 - 230E - 17 − 21) = 11%
Section 2    WPI FEC OCC AGE PD
The rating for the diabetes is:
50% (10.01.00.00 - 20 - [2] 23 - 230F - 23 − 29) = 15%
Section 2    WPI FEC OCC AGE PD
19 (lumbar spine) C 15 (diabetes) = 31
31 C 11 (heart) = 39% Final PD after apportionment
If there is apportionment for the heart and diabetic conditions and none for the lumbar spine, the final permanent
disability rating is 39% after apportionment. Note that the WCJ has to apply the apportionment to separate parts of
Page 3 of 4
§ 5.04 Example 3: More Than One Body Part Injured in More Than One Injury
body before combining the ratings. This apportionment analysis would apply only if there was a single injury with
apportionment to two parts of body injured, i.e., the heart and diabetes, and no apportionment for the lumbar spine.
But the applicant alleged that his back injury was due to a specific injury and the heart and diabetes conditions were
a result of cumulative trauma. In that event, the Benson case [see Benson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2009)
170 Cal. App. 4th 1535, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113] mandates separate awards for each injury. So under Benson,
the applicant would receive one award for the lumbar spine for 19% PD and a separate award for the heart and
diabetes conditions: 15 (diabetes) C 11 (heart) = 24% PD. Counsel for the applicant would be hard pressed to
argue that the lumbar spine, heart and diabetes conditions were “inextricably intertwined,” resulting in one award for
all conditions. See Ch. 8, § 8.08[3] of this guidebook for a discussion on the Benson case.
NOTE:
You can use the same formula used above to re-calculate the combined ratings and the results are the
same if you use the Combined Values Chart in the 2005 PDRS, pages 8-1 through 8-4. You are advised to
learn both methods for completion of your understanding of the rating schedule. The Multiple Disabilities
Schedule used in the 1997 Rating Schedule does not apply to the 2005 PDRS calculations. ■
When combining multiple body parts, use the above formula of the Combined Values Chart at the end of the 2005
PDRS. The schedule requires that the highest two permanent disability ratings be combined. You then take the next
highest permanent disability rating and combine it with the prior combination and so on. The combined rating for an
extremity after adjustments for FEC, occupation, and age cannot exceed the amputation value of the extremity
(60% WPI for an upper extremity amputation, 40% WPI for a lower extremity amputation). See AMA Guides
Chapters 16 and 17, respectively.
NOTE:
The FEC number in brackets is the loss of future earning capacity adjustment for each body part injured as
found on page 2-4 of the 2005 PDRS. The number next to the bracket is the adjustment from whole person
impairment to permanent disability as adjusted by the loss of future earnings from the table on page 2-6. ■
Here, in this example, the applicant is a film technician with an occupational group 230, and the occupational
variant for the heart and lumbar spine is an E and the diabetes is an F. The applicant is 58 years old on the date of
injury, so the permanent disability rating is increased since he is over 41 years of age on the date of injury. In both
the 1997 and 2005 rating schedules, the adjustment for age reduces a permanent disability if the injured employee
is younger than 38, and the adjustment for age increases a permanent disability if the injured employee is older
than 41.
Under the 2013 PDRS, if these injuries occurred on or after 1/1/2013, the ratings would be as follows:
The rating for the back is as follows:
100% (15.03.01.02 - 13 − [13 × 1.4] 18 - 230E - 16 − 20) = 20%
Section 2    WPI [WPI × 1.4] OCC AGE PD
The rating for the heart is as follows:
50% (03.02.00.00 - 15 - [15 × .4] 21 - 230E - 19 − 24) = 12%
Section 2    WPI [WPI × 1.4] OCC AGE PD
Page 4 of 4
§ 5.04 Example 3: More Than One Body Part Injured in More Than One Injury
The rating for the diabetes is:
50% (10.01.00.00 - 20 − [20 × 1.4] 28 - 230F - 28 − 34) = 17%
Section 2    WPI [WPI × 1.4] OCC AGE PD
Since there are two separate injuries, a specific injury to the lumbar spine and a cumulative trauma injury to the
heart and diabetes, there would be two awards: the back injury would be a 20% final permanent disability award,
and the combined heart and diabetes award would be 17 (diabetes) C 12 (heart) = 27% final PD. So the applicant
would receive one award for 20% and the other for 27%. This is a modest increase in PD based on the elimination
of the FEC adjustments under the 2005 PDRS and the inclusion of the 1.4 adjustment factor under the 2013 PDRS
requirement of Labor Code § 4660.1.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 5.05
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 5
Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
§ 5.05 Example 4: Failed Back Case With Psychiatric and Pain Sequelae
This example demonstrates an injury and rating for a failed back case with psychiatric and pain sequelae:
A 48-year-old attorney injures his lumbar spine lifting a heavy box of files and sustains a herniated disc at L5-S1.
He has back surgery with post surgical development of scar tissue, resulting in failed lumbar syndrome. There are
severe effects of the applicant’s activities of daily living (ADLs) due to the physical consequences of the spinal injury
and surgery. An orthopedic AME opines that the applicant has a Diagnosis Related Estimate (DRE) Category III
13% WPI lumbar spine impairment (AMA Guides Chapter 15, Table 15-3) with a 3% WPI add-on for pain (AMA
Guides Chapter 18).
In addition, an AME in psychiatry opines that the applicant suffers from clinical depression due to his lack of
activities and loss of his ability to practice law. When applicant is declared permanent and stationary by the AME,
the doctor concludes that the depression is causing permanent impairment with a GAF (Global Assessment of
Functioning) score of 51 (a moderate to severe depression with a severe difficulty in occupational functioning; see
AMA Guides Chapter 14; 2005 PDRS, pages 1-12 through 1-16). There is no apportionment to non-industrial
factors.
The rating on the back with the pain add-on is as follows:
15.03.01.00 − 13 + 3 = 16 − [5] 20 − 110C − 15 - 17
Section 2     WPI FEC  OCC AGE PD
The rating for the psyche is:
14.01.00.00 - GAF-51 - 29 - [8] 41 - 110J - 54 - 58
 Section 2   GAF WPI FEC OCC AGE PD
Using the Combined Values Chart on pages 8-1 through 8-4:
58% (psyche) C 17% (back) = 65% PD
The applicant has a permanent disability rating of 65%, assuming there is no apportionment. If there were
apportionment to non-industrial causes for either the lumbar spine or psyche or both, then prior to combining the
disability ratings, you need to reduce each body part rating by the appropriate apportionment percentage and then
combine.
NOTE:
The FEC number in brackets is the loss of future earning capacity adjustment for each body part injured as
found on page 2-4 of the 2005 PDRS. The number next to the bracket is the adjustment from whole person
impairment to permanent disability as adjusted by the loss of future earnings from the table on page 2-6.
The adjustments for occupation and age are the same as in the 1997 Rating Schedule, and the tables for
these are included in the 2005 PDRS. ■
Page 2 of 3
§ 5.05 Example 4: Failed Back Case With Psychiatric and Pain Sequelae
Here, in this example, the applicant is an attorney with an occupational group 110, and the occupational variant for
the lumbar spine is a C and for the psyche takes a J. Note how the psyche standard permanent disability rating is
derived from the 2005 PDRS from page 1-16 where the GAF score is converted into a WPI rating. That amount is
then increased by 40% due to the FEC adjustment for psychiatric injuries on page 1-7 of the 2005 PDRS. The
psychiatric rating also substantially increases since the applicant is an attorney.
The same case would rate if the date of injury was on or after 1/1/2013 under the 2013 PDRS as follows:
The rating on the back with the pain add-on is as follows:
15.03.01.00 − 13 + 3 = 16 − [16 × 1.4] 22 − 110C − 16 - 18
Section 2     WPI [WPI × 1.4] OCC AGE PD
The rating for the psyche is:
14.01.00.00 - GAF-51 - 29 - [29 × 1.4] 41 - 110J - 54 - 58
Section 2 GAF WPI [WPI × 1.4] OCC AGE PD
The combined orthopedic and psychiatric disabilities would be as follows:
58 (psyche) C 18 (lumbar spine) = 66% Final PD
Notice in this case that the psychiatric disorder rates the same under both the 2005 PDRS and the 2013 PDRS.
Why? The 2005 PDRS FEC rank for psychiatric disorders is a Rank 8, which increases the WPI rating by 40%. For
injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, there is no FEC adjustment, but each separate WPI rating is increased by a
factor of 40%. The permanent disability rating for the back increased from 14% PD to 18% PD if this injury occurred
on or after 1/1/2013.
CAUTION:
This example is a perfect one to illustrate the consequences of SB 863 for injuries occurring on or after
1/1/2013 if a psychiatric disorder is caused by a physical injury. In this example, the injured attorney suffered
from a failed lumbar spinal surgery resulting in severe depression. The lumbar injury was a result of lifting a
heavy box of files. Under Labor Code § 4660.1(c), permanent disability cannot be increased due to a
psychiatric disorder that is a result of a physical injury unless the injury is “catastrophic.”■
If the WCAB or higher court determines that lifting a heavy box of files is not “catastrophic”, then the applicant is
precluded from the increase of permanent disability of 58% due to the psychiatric disability. On the other hand, if
the WCAB or higher court determines that the result of an injury is “catastrophic”, then the 58% permanent
psychiatric disability can be combined as an increase to the permanent orthopedic spinal disability. We will see this
issue evolve soon, probably by the time the next edition of this guidebook is written.
Also, in a failed lumbar syndrome case such as this, it is unlikely that a strict DRE Category III 13% WPI rating
would be the most accurate rating. If the injured attorney is represented by competent legal counsel, he or she
would develop the record to establish a more accurate rating in a case like this. See Chs. 3, 4, 7, and 8 of this
guidebook on how to develop the record.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 3 of 3
§ 5.05 Example 4: Failed Back Case With Psychiatric and Pain Sequelae
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 5.06
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 5
Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
§ 5.06 Example 5: Voice/Speech Impairment
The following example is derived from an actual case that occurred after the adoption of the AMA Guides by the
Administrative Director and demonstrates how the AMA Guides apply in our newer cases:
A 58-year-old elementary school teacher develops chronic hoarseness and difficulty speaking after a few hours of
work at school. The overall symptoms develop over time during her 31 years of teaching second and third grade at
the same school. She seeks medical attention, and her ENT physician diagnoses swollen vocal cords and polyps
resulting in Reinke’s edema. She has surgery in the form of laser ablation of the edema and polyps, resulting in
chronic hoarseness and fatigue of her voice. He releases her to return to part-time teaching with use of a
microphone in the classroom.
He opines that applicant has a Class 2, 15%–34% Voice/Speech impairment for audibility; a Class 1, 0%–14%
Voice/Speech impairment for intelligibility; and a Class 3, 35%–59% Voice/Speech impairment for functional
efficiency based upon Table 11-8 on page 265 of the AMA Guides. He states her functional efficiency impairment is
35%, the low end of Class 3. Table 11-9 states that if applicant has a 35% Voice/Speech impairment, she has a
12% WPI.
The physician’s conclusions in this case are based upon the instructions in the AMA Guides that require the
physician to evaluate the speech/voice impairments according to three criteria—“audibility,” “Intelligibility” and
“functional efficiency”—each from Class 1 through Class 5 impairment ranges. Since the applicant has a Class 2
impairment for audibility, a Class 1 for intelligibility, and a Class 3 for functional efficiency, she is rated with the
highest class for the three types of impairments. The highest class is then rated within the class and the
Voice/Speech impairment is converted to WPI in Table 11-9. The physician is instructed to use the highest
percentage of impairment recorded in any of the three criteria in Table 11-8.
The permanent disability rating in this case is as follows:
11.03.04.00 - 12 - [2] 14 - 214J - 22 - 28
 Section 2 WPI FEC OCC AGE PD
The applicant has a 28% permanent disability due to her voice/speech impairment.
Under the 2013 PDRS, if this injury occurred on or after 1/1/2013, the rating would be as follows:
11.03.04.00 - 12 − [12 × 1.4] 17 - 214J - 26 − 32% Final PD
Section 2 WPI [WPI × 1.4] OCC AGE PD
Again, this is a modest increase in permanent disability over what this injured worker received under the 2005
PDRS in an injury that occurred prior to 1/1/2013.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 5.07
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 5
Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
§ 5.07 Example 6: Recurrent Disc Herniation
The following example is derived from an actual case that occurred after the adoption of the AMA Guides by the
Administrative Director and demonstrates how the AMA Guides apply in our newer cases:
The applicant is a 55-year-old truck driver for the movie industry who developed low back pain with right lower
extremity radiculopathy in 2005 and had successful lumbar surgery with a hemi-laminectomy at L4-L5. He returned
to work with no symptoms. In 2012, he was lifting some furniture for a movie set when he reinjured his back. An
MRI showed a recurrent herniated disc at the same level and side as before. He had a repeat surgery with
discectomy, resulting in no resolution of his symptoms and continued right lower extremity pain.
His doctor made the following findings: Straight leg raise test caused pain along the lateral right leg and foot at 30
degrees. The right Achilles reflex was absent with S1 nerve root distribution numbness. Double inclinometer range
of motion testing resulted in lumbar extension 20 degrees, flexion 30 degrees, left lateral flexion 25 degrees, and
right lateral flexion 20 degrees. The sensory changes in the S1 nerve distribution is Grade 4 according to Table 15-
15 of the AMA Guides and muscle weakness in the S1 innervated muscles was Grade 4 according to Table 15-16
of the AMA Guides. The doctor concluded that the applicant has a 20% WPI in this case.
The proper medical-legal analysis of the case is as follows:
1. DRE or ROM method? The physician correctly applied the ROM method here because the applicant has a
recurrent disc herniation within the same sub-region of the spine.
2. The spinal diagnosis in Table 15-7 of the AMA Guides indicates that the applicant has a 12% WPI due to
“surgically treated disc lesion with residual medically documented pain and rigidity.”
3. Applicant’s loss of motion is 7% WPI because of 2% WPI from lumbar extension, 4% WPI from loss of flexion
(Table 15-8), 0% WPI for left lateral flexion (25 degrees is normal), and 1% WPI for right lateral flexion
(Table 15-9). Add the loss of range of motion amounts.
4. To evaluate the sensory loss, the physician must grade the loss using Table 15-15 of the AMA Guides. The
applicant has a sensory loss of grade 4, which is 25% the value of the maximum loss of sensation for the
S1 nerve, which is 5% lower extremity impairment from Table 15-18 of the AMA Guides and is equal to 1%
rating for sensory loss. A 1% lower extremity converted to WPI is still 1% WPI.
5. To evaluate the motor loss, the physician graded the loss from Table 15-16 of the AMA Guides as Grade 4, a
25% loss times the value of total motor loss of the S1 innervated muscles, which is 20% from Table 15-18
of the AMA Guides. This equals a 5% lower extremity rating, which is a 2% WPI.
6. Combining the 1% WPI sensory loss with the 2% motor loss is equal to 3% WPI for neurological loss.
7. Finally, to obtain the final ROM rating, combine the spinal diagnostic rating with the range of motion loss and
the neurological loss. Combining the spinal disorder rating (12%) with the added range of motion losses
(7%) and the neurological loss (3%) equals 20% WPI.
The final permanent disability rating for this case is:
15.03.02.04 - 20 - [5]25 - 350G - 28 - 33
 Section 2 WPI FEC OCC AGE PD
Page 2 of 2
§ 5.07 Example 6: Recurrent Disc Herniation
This applicant has a permanent disability rating of 33% before apportionment.
If the second injury occurred on or after 1/1/2013, the rating would be as follows:
15.03.02.04 - 20 - [20 × 1.4] 28 - 350G - 31 − 36% Final PD
Section 2 WPI [WPI × 1.4] OCC AGE PD
The issue of apportionment is problematic in this case. If there was a prior award under the 2005 PDRS, then
defense counsel would have the burden of proving the existence of a prior award and overlap between the old 2005
injury and the 2012 new injury before valid, legal apportionment would apply under Labor Code § 4664. The other
approach would be for defense counsel to ask the treating or evaluating physician approximately what percentage
of permanent disability is caused by the 2012 injury and what percentage is caused by the injury from 2005 under
Labor Code § 4663 apportionment. In a case like this one, defense counsel should establish apportionment using
both methods, if possible. See Ch. 8, § 8.08 of this guidebook.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 5.08
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 5
Application of AMA Guides and PDRS, and Effect of SB 863
§ 5.08 Example 7: Multiple Upper Extremity Injuries
The following example is derived from an actual case that occurred after the adoption of the AMA Guides by the
Administrative Director and demonstrates how the AMA Guides apply in our newer cases:
The applicant is a 52-year-old video store employee who slipped and fell on some plastic video covers and injured
her right wrist, thumb, elbow, right shoulder, and left hand. She had multiple hand, thumb, elbow, and wrist
surgeries with significant residual complaints. There are AME physicians in orthopedic surgery and psychiatry. The
applicant, in addition to having multiple upper extremity surgeries, developed a chronic pain syndrome and is highly
addicted and dependent on opioid medications. The psychiatric AME opines that the applicant has a GAF score of
50, which is a 30% WPI rating under the 2005 PDRS on page 1-16.
The AME orthopedic surgeon writes his report after completing the AMA Guides upper extremity chart on pages
436 and 437 (Figures 16-1a and 16-1b):
“The patient can be rated in several different ways. The first way is based upon her measurements and clinical
presentation. If we look at her right upper extremity, there is decreased motion in her thumb, which is 7% of her
hand or 6% of the upper extremity (the hand is 90% of the upper extremity; 90% of 7 is 6% upper extremity
impairment [UEI]). There is decreased motion in her right wrist and her shoulder so the regional impairment
combined (right wrist 11%, right hand 6%, elbow 0% and shoulder 7% UEI) is 22% UEI. [This is from the chart
in the AMA Guides, referred to above and labeled Figure 16-53a.]
“If we take a look at Tables 16-10, 11 and 15, she has a radial neuropathy as grade 3: 60% loss of function ×
38, the value of the radial nerve, which equals 23% UEI. She also has some minor problems from the cubital
tunnel release, grade 4: 20% × 50 is 10% UEI and combined is 31% UEI.
“She also has significant loss of strength with atrophy in the forearm. The strength loss index is appropriate
using Table 16-34. She has a 65% loss of strength but part of that is due to the neuropathy so I am able to
allocate a 20% UEI × 60, the value of the wrist, is 12% UEI. Combining those, we have an upper extremity
impairment on the right of 52% or 30% WPI (52% × 60% = 31%). This is also a 3% WPI for pain perception.
“On the left side, she does have minimal residuals following the carpal tunnel surgery. Using Tables 16-10, 11
and 15, she has carpal tunnel grade 4, 5% × 45 is a 3% UEI or 2% WPI. If we combine 31% on the right plus
2% for the left, we come up with 32%, plus 3% for pain resulting in a 35% WPI rating as a consequence of her
injuries.
“Another way to evaluate exactly what is going on is to classify her using Table 13-16. We are dealing
essentially with a significant loss of function due to pain perception in her dominant upper extremity. She can
be classified as having a Class 3, since she is able to do self-care but has difficulty and hence, she would have
a rating for her dominant arm of again approximately 33% or 35% and that, of course, takes into consideration,
pain. So if we combine 2% for the left side, it comes out to be approximately the same, namely 35–37% WPI
due to the injury sustained at the employer.”
NOTE:
Page 2 of 4
§ 5.08 Example 7: Multiple Upper Extremity Injuries
Every upper extremity medical report should have the charts as indicated in the AMA Guides so that you can
determine whether anything is missing in terms of range of motion, peripheral nerve deficits, muscle strength
deficits, regional impairments, and parts of body injured. ■
This is a very complicated upper extremity case, and it is chosen not for the permanent disability rating, but for the
fact that the AME here used both AMA Guides Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities, and AMA Guides Chapter 13,
The Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems. Since the applicant’s injuries were directly related to the peripheral
nerves and not caused by a head injury, AMA Guides Chapter 13’s analysis may not apply here, but the ratings
turned out the same regardless of which method applied.
The AME here combined the regional UEI ratings for the hand (the thumb was converted to hand impairment by
multiplying the thumb rating by 90%), wrist, elbow, and shoulder on the right side, which equals 22% UEI. The
physician then evaluated the peripheral nerve system impairment with radial nerve grade 3: 60% × 38% = 23% UEI,
and the cubital tunnel grade 4: 20% × 50 = 10% UEI combined to 31% UEI. He then assessed “other disorders” as
the strength loss index under Table 16-34 of the AMA Guides as 65% loss of strength of which 20% UEI × 60 =
12% UEI.
The final rating under AMA Guides Chapter 16 was combining the regional rating of 22% UEI with 31% UEI
neurological impairments with the strength loss index of 12% WPI, which is 52% UEI. Multiplying the UEI × 60%,
there is a 31% WPI for the right upper extremity. Combining the 2% WPI for the left wrist yields a 32% WPI. The
doctor then added 3% WPI for pain, and the applicant is awarded a 35% WPI rating for all injuries to both upper
extremities.
NOTE:
In the above example, the permanent disability rating would require the disability evaluator to rate the thumb
separately from the wrist, separately from the elbow, and separately from the shoulder since there are
different future earning capacity adjustments for each part of the upper extremity. In such a case, it would be
prudent to obtain a disability rating from an experienced disability evaluator who has had extensive training
on evaluating upper extremities. The judges and the WCAB itself will have to rely on the expertise of the
disability evaluators to determine whether a rating from a report like this is correct. The AME provides only
the numbers, and the raters will rely on the charts required under AMA Guides Chapter 16 as indicated
above, since the charts force the doctor to evaluate each upper extremity part of body injured separately. In
every upper extremity case, practitioners should follow Figures 16-1a and 16-1b for quality control of the
medical reports. ■
The psychiatric disability rates as follows:
14.02.00.00 − 30 − [8] 42 − 214I − 51 − 57%
NOTE:
This injury occurred years ago, but if it occurred on or after 1/1/2013, the psychiatric disability would still rate
57% permanent disability because under the 2005 PDRS, the FEC adjustment would increase the 30% WPI
by 40% as does the 1.4 adjustment factor that applies to all parts of body in 2013 and later injuries, without
any FEC adjustments. ■
Page 3 of 4
§ 5.08 Example 7: Multiple Upper Extremity Injuries
The orthopedic conditions rate under the 2005 PDRS as follows:
Right Thumb ROM:
16.06.01.04 − 4 − [1] 4 − 214G − 5 − 6
Right Shoulder:
ROM:
16.02.01.00 − 4 − [7] 5 − 214F − 5 − 6
Right Wrist ROM:
16.04.02.00 − 7 − [4] 9 − 214G − 11 – 13
Right Wrist Radial
Nerve:
16.01.02.03 − 14 +3 pain 17 − [5] 22 −
214G − 24 − 28
Right Elbow Ulnar
Nerve:
16.01.02.03 − 6 − [5]8 − 214F − 8 − 10
Grip Loss:
16.01.04.00 − 7 − [4]9 − 214F − 9 − 11
Left Wrist ROM:
16.01.02.02 − 2 − [4]2 − 214G − 3 − 4
The right wrist ROM and neurologic impairments combine 28 C 13 = 37% PD
The Combined Values Chart combines the psyche rating of 57% with the right wrist and gradually descending
ratings for each body part as follows:
57 (psyche) C 37 (right wrist) = 73
73 C 11 (grip) = 76
76 C 10 (right elbow) = 78
78 C 6 (right thumb) = 79
79 C 6 (right shoulder) = 80
80 C 4 (left wrist) = 81% Final PD
The orthopedic surgeon used an alternative rating method under Ch. 13 of the AMA Guides, which is now
commonly used by physicians who are very familiar with the Guides. The alternative method rates as follows:
Right wrist Table 13-16, Class 3 35% WPI:
13.11.01.02 − 35 − [5] 45 − 214G − 48 − 54%
The psyche rates 57% from above.
57 (psyche) C 54 (chr. pain) = 80
80 C 4 (left wrist) = 81% Final PD
So you can see that the alternative rating comes out the same as the strict rating as stated in the AME’s report.
If this injury occurred in 2013, the final PD rating would potentially be only slightly higher since all parts of body WPI
ratings go up 40%, whereas in the 2005 PDRS they increased an average overall FEC adjustment of 28% (as a
multiplier times each WPI rating).
CAUTION:
In this example, if the injury occurred on or after 1/1/2013, the psychiatric condition that is caused by the
chronic pain and drug addiction/dependency may not be allowed to cause an increase in the orthopedic
permanent disability rating under the limitations of Labor Code § 4660.1(c), unless this case is considered by
law to be a “catastrophic” injury. ■
Page 4 of 4
§ 5.08 Example 7: Multiple Upper Extremity Injuries
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp CHAPTER 6.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 6
Case Summaries With Commentary and Current Issues Affecting Permanent Disability Ratings
CHAPTER 6 Case Summaries With Commentary and Current Issues
Affecting Permanent Disability Ratings
§ 6.01  Introduction
§ 6.02  Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
[1]  Leading Cases
[2]  Noteworthy Panel Decisions
[a]  Apportionment
[b]  Combined Values Chart
[c]  Ratings Under the AMA Guides
[d]  Permanent Total Disability
§ 6.03  Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
[1]  Labor Code Section 4660.1(c) Larsen v. Securitas Security Services
[2]  Labor Code Section 4662 and Vocational Experts
[3]  Medical Marijuana Current Research
[4]  Apportionment Post-2018: The Rice, Hikida, Lindh, and Other Cases
[a]  Rice
[b]  Hikida
[c]  Apportionment Under the AMA Guides
[i]  Generally
[ii]  Risk Factors and Causation of Permanent Disability
[iii]  Inextricably Intertwined—Benson Revisited and the AMA Guides
[iv]  Can a Risk Factor Become Causative?
[v]  The Lindh Decision
Page 2 of 2
Synopsis to CHAPTER 6 : Case Summaries With Commentary and Current Issues Affecting Permanent
Disability Ratings
[vi]  Duty to Develop Record
[vii]  Final Apportionment Checklist
[viii]  Prior Awards
[ix]  Practice Points and Take-Aways
[d]  The Brodie Case: Defines Permanent Disability and Apportionment
[e]  Select Cases on Apportionment
§ 6.04  Questions Doctors Ask Us
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 6.01
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 6
Case Summaries With Commentary and Current Issues Affecting Permanent Disability Ratings
§ 6.01 Introduction
In Ch. 6 of this guidebook, case summaries and commentary relating to permanent disability under the AMA
Guides, apportionment, and the 2005 PDRS will be compiled for quick reference and will cover:
• Cases at the WCAB level, including significant panel decisions and en banc decisions. The WCAB itself votes
to determine whether one of its panel decisions is a “significant panel decision” as it does to vote to decide
a case en banc.
• WCAB “noteworthy panel decisions.” (The author of this guidebook is a member of the LexisNexis® California
Workers’ Compensation Editorial Board, and he helps determine which WCAB panel decisions are
“noteworthy.” These are panel decisions that the WCAB has not designated as “significant panel
decisions.” Note that practitioners should proceed with caution when citing to a panel decision and should
also verify the subsequent history of the decision. WCAB panel decisions are citeable authority, particularly
on issues of contemporaneous administrative construction of statutory language [see Griffin v. WCAB
(1989) 209 Cal. App. 3d 1260, 1264, fn. 2, 54 Cal. Comp. Cases 145]. However, WCAB panel decisions
are not binding precedent, as are en banc decisions, on all other Appeals Board panels and workers’
compensation judges [see Gee v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2002) 96 Cal. App. 4th 1418, 1425 fn. 6,
67 Cal. Comp. Cases 236]. LexisNexis editorial consultants have deemed this panel decision noteworthy
because it does one or more of the following: (1) Establishes a new rule of law, applies an existing rule to a
set of facts significantly different from those stated in other decisions, or modifies, or criticizes with reasons
given, an existing rule; (2) Resolves or creates an apparent conflict in the law; (3) Involves a legal issue of
continuing public interest; (4) Makes a significant contribution to legal literature by reviewing either the
development of workers’ compensation law or the legislative, regulatory, or judicial history of a constitution,
statute, regulation, or other written law; and/or (5) Makes a contribution to the body of law available to
attorneys, claims personnel, judges, the Board, and others seeking to understand the workers’
compensation law of California.)
• Forthcoming appellate decisions from the Courts of Appeal and Supreme Court.
• Apportionment of permanent disability. This section includes for the first time in this guidebook a detailed
compendium of a discussion of legal, valid apportionment and case law that describes issues of
apportionment within the context of permanent disability that is based on WPI ratings from the AMA
Guides.
Since the first edition of this guidebook, we decided to include in this chapter summaries of cases that have become
famous, infamous, or otherwise noteworthy on the subject of permanent disability and apportionment. Every year
we come across hundreds of Noteworthy Panel Decisions, WCAB en banc decisions, published District Court of
Appeal decisions, and an occasional Supreme Court decision that we believe should be included in this guidebook.
But due to space limitations and practical considerations, we can only include a few cases that can demonstrate the
thinking of appellate level judges and WCAB commissioners that pertain to permanent disability or apportionment.
We have added a psychiatric case that adds to the debate about compensability of those cases that are labeled
mental-physical, mental-mental, or physical-mental.
In addition, we are adding some articles that were previously published that should be included in this guidebook for
your reference including an interpretation of what constitutes a “violent act” as an exception to restrictions against
permanent psychiatric disability as a result of a physical injury post 1/1/13. Also included is a detailed discussion of
Page 2 of 2
§ 6.01 Introduction
Labor Code § 4662 since it was amended in 2014, effective in 2015. Finally, with recreational marijuana being
legalized in California and in many other states, we are including a comprehensive discussion of medical marijuana
and current research on its affects, potential benefits, and risks of its use.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 6.02
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 6
Case Summaries With Commentary and Current Issues Affecting Permanent Disability Ratings
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
[1] Leading Cases
■ MARLENE ESCOBEDO, APPLICANT v. MARSHALLS, CNA INSURANCE CO., DEFENDANTS
W.C.A.B. Nos. GRO 0029816, GRO 029817—WCJ Michael D. LeCover (GRO); WCAB En Banc:
Chairman Rabine, Commissioners O’Brien, Cuneo, Murray, Brass, Caplane
Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board (en banc)
70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604; 2005 Cal. Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 71
Opinion Filed April 19, 2005
Petition for Writ of Review Denied sub nom. Escobedo v. W.C.A.B. (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 1506
DISPOSITION: The Findings and Award issued June 29, 2004, is affirmed.
HEADNOTES: Permanent Disability—Apportionment—SB 899—Causation—WCAB en banc, affirming
WCJ’s apportionment decree issued pursuant to SB 899, held that Labor Code § 4663(a)’s requirement
that apportionment be based on “causation” refers to causation of permanent disability, not to causation of
injury, and that analysis of causal factors of permanent disability for purposes of apportionment may be
different from analysis of causal factors of injury, in that percentage to which applicant’s injury is causally
related to employment is not necessarily same as percentage to which applicant’s permanent disability is
causally related to injury. [See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’ Comp. 2d §§ 8.05[1]–
[3], 8.06[1], [4], [5][c][iii], 8.07[1].]
Permanent Disability—Apportionment; SB 899—Apportionment Determinations—WCAB en banc held that
Labor Code § 4663(c) not only prescribes apportionment determinations that reporting physician must
make, but also prescribes standards WCAB must use in deciding apportionment, so that both physician
and WCAB must make determinations of percentage of permanent disability directly caused by industrial
injury and percentage caused by other factors. [See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’
Comp. 2d §§ 8.05[1]–[3], 8.06[1], [4], [5][c][iii], 8.07[1].].
Permanent Disability—Apportionment—SB 899—Burdens of Proof—WCAB en banc held that, under Labor
Code § 4663(c), applicant has burden of establishing percentage of permanent disability directly caused by
industrial injury, and defendant has burden of establishing percentage of disability caused by other factors.
[See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’ Comp. 2d §§ 8.05[1]–[3], 8.06[1], [4], [5][c][iii],
8.07[1].]
Permanent Disability—Apportionment—SB 899—Factors to Be Considered in Apportionment—WCAB en
banc held that apportionment of permanent disability caused by, in words of Labor Code § 4663(c), “other
factors both before and subsequent to the industrial injury, including prior industrial injuries” may include
not only disability that could have been apportioned prior to SB 899, but also may include disability that
formerly could not have been apportioned (e.g., pathology, asymptomatic prior conditions, and retroactive
prophylactic work preclusions), provided there is substantial medical evidence establishing that these other
factors have caused permanent disability, so that in present case apportionment could be based on non-
industrial pathology, since substantial medical evidence established that non-industrial pathology had
caused permanent disability. [See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’ Comp. 2d
§§ 8.05[1]–[3], 8.06[1], [4], [5][c][iii], 8.07[1].]
Page 2 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
Permanent Disability—Apportionment—SB 899—Medical Reports as Substantial Evidence—WCAB en
banc held that, even when medical report addresses issue of causation of permanent disability and makes
apportionment determination by finding approximate relative percentages of industrial and non-industrial
causation under Labor Code § 4663(a), report may not be relied on unless it also constitutes substantial
evidence, which means that medical opinion must be framed in terms of reasonable medical probability,
must not be speculative, must be based on pertinent facts and on adequate examination and history, and
must set forth reasoning in support of its conclusions, all of which requirements were satisfied by medical
report relied on by WCJ in present case that involved preexisting degenerative arthritis in both of
applicant’s knees. [See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’ Comp. 2d §§ 8.05[1]–[3],
8.06[1], [4], [5][c][iii], 8.07[1]; Attorneys’ Textbook of Medicine, Chs. 7A, 19; Common Diagnostic
Procedures, Chs. 2, 24, 30.]
CASE SUMMARY: The Appeals Board en banc held that Labor Code § 4663(c) not only prescribes
apportionment determinations that the reporting physician must make, but also prescribes standards the
Appeals Board must use in deciding apportionment, so that both the physician and the Board must make
determinations of the percentage of permanent disability directly caused by the industrial injury and the
percentage caused by other factors. The Board further held that, pursuant to that same subsection, the
employee has the burden of establishing the percentage of permanent disability directly caused by the
industrial injury, and the employer has the burden of establishing the percentage of disability caused by
other factors. Finally, the Board held that apportionment of permanent disability caused by, in the words of
Labor Code § 4663(c), “other factors both before and subsequent to the industrial injury, including prior
industrial injuries,” may include not only disability that could have been apportioned prior to SB 899, but
also may include disability that formerly could not have been apportioned (e.g., pathology, asymptomatic
prior conditions, and retroactive prophylactic work preclusions), provided there is substantial medical
evidence establishing that these other factors have caused permanent disability, so that in the present
case apportionment could be based on non-industrial pathology, since substantial medical evidence
established that non-industrial pathology had caused permanent disability.
COMMENTARY:
Many physicians are ignoring the most important part of the Escobedo decision in which the WCAB
mandates that the physician state with reasonable medical probability how and why a pathology, prior
asymptomatic condition, or a retroactive prophylactic restriction or “other factor” is causing permanent
disability at the time the applicant became permanent and stationary. A mere statement by a physician
that “25% of the applicant’s [back, wrist, etc. part of body] permanent disability is caused by ‘idiopathic
factors,’ ‘stenosis,’ ‘arthritis,’ ‘spondylosis’ ” is not substantial evidence unless and until the physician
states the rationale for such a conclusion and explains how and why any of these other factors is
causing permanent disability.
The problem is made more difficult when the AMA Guides apply in a case since AMA Guides Chapter
1 instructs the physician that he or she can apportion a current impairment to a prior impairment or a
current impairment can be made worse by a prior impairment. The issue begs the question since the
physician must state with reasonable medical probability as to how and why an impairment exists from
a work-related injury and what other factors, if any, are causing that impairment. The medical-legal
question that needs to be answered in appellate cases is, can you apportion a current impairment
based upon a prior permanent disability that did not result in an “impairment” as defined in the AMA
Guides?
The WCAB was careful to state in footnote 9 of its opinion that it was not deciding how apportionment
of permanent disability will be determined if an industrial injury aggravates, accelerates, exacerbates,
or otherwise “lights up” an underlying non-industrial medical condition. Labor Code § 4663 mandates
that the physician determine with reasonable medical probability approximately what percentage of
permanent disability is directly caused by the industrial injury and approximately what percentage of
permanent disability is caused by other factors. The WCAB has not decided how apportionment under
Labor Code § 4663 applies if the permanent disability is caused by the “lighting up” of a non-industrial
Page 3 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
condition. For example, what happens if an employee is injured by stepping on a rusty nail at work, he
loses his leg on account of his underlying diabetic condition lighting up, and the nail wound becomes
infected, resulting in the amputation of the leg?
■ CITY OF SACRAMENTO, PETITIONER v. WORKERS’ COMPENSATION APPEALS BOARD AND
ARTHUR CANNON, RESPONDENTS
W.C.A.B. No. ADJ7238353—WCJ Dominic E. Marcelli (FRE); WCAB Panel: Commissioners Sweeney,
Brass, Lowe (dissenting) [see Cannon v. City of Sacramento, 2012 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 615
(Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)]
Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District
222 Cal. App. 4th 1360, 167 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1, 2013 Cal. App. LEXIS 1078
Opinion Filed December 26, 2013
SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: The Publication Status of this Document has been Changed by the Court from
Unpublished to Published January 15, 2014.
DISPOSITION: Petition for writ of review of a decision of the Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board.
Petition for writ of review granted, WCAB decision affirmed, and respondent to recover costs on appeal.
HEADNOTE: Permanent Disability—Rating—AMA Guides—Court of Appeal, affirming WCAB opinion and
decision, held that rating of impairment by analogy to different condition is permissible when no objective
abnormalities are found and rating is based solely on subjective complaints of pain and that rating by
analogy is not limited to complex or extraordinary cases, when Court of Appeal found that applicant injured
left foot AOE/COE while working as police officer for defendant, that agreed medical evaluator reported
that it was acceptable to characterize applicant’s residual condition “using a gait derangement abnormality”
“by analogy, using Almaraz/Guzman-II as a basis,” that agreed medical evaluator noted that “heel pain, or
for that matter, other aspects of pain that do not have any accompanying objective measurement
abnormalities, do not rate anything in the AMA Guides, whether or not these problems interfere with one’s
activities,” that applicant’s heel pain “interferes with weightbearing activities, particularly running,” and that
he “thought that by analogy, it would be similar to an individual with a limp and arthritis, resulting in the 7%
impairment recommended” by agreed medical evaluator, that Labor Code § 4660(b)(1) does not mandate
that impairment for any particular condition be assessed in any particular way under AMA Guides, and that
statute provides merely that “the ‘nature of the physical injury or disfigurement’ shall incorporate [emphasis
by court of appeal] the descriptions and measurements of physical impairments and the corresponding
percentages of impairments.” [See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’ Comp. 2d
§ 32.03A[1]; The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers’ Compensation, Chs. 2, 3, 6.]
CASE SUMMARY: Petitioner employer appealed a decision from respondent Workers’ Compensation
Appeals Board (California), which, after reconsideration, determined that respondent claimant was entitled
to a permanent disability rating based on an agreed medical examiner’s findings. The claimant injured his
left foot and heel while working. He was diagnosed with plantar fasciitis and received treatment. After his
condition became permanent and stationary, no objective abnormalities were identifiable, but he continued
to experience pain in his left heel that affected weight-bearing activities. An agreed medical examiner
determined that the claimant’s condition was equivalent to a limp with arthritis, which resulted in a seven
percent whole person impairment for purposes of determining permanent disability. The court held that it
was not improper to rate a claimant’s condition by analogy where there were no objective findings and the
rating was based solely upon a subjective experience of pain. Such a rating complied with the requirement
of Lab. Code, § 4660, subd. (b)(1), to incorporate the American Medical Association (AMA) Guides to the
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (5th Edition) in determining the whole person impairment component
of a scheduled permanent disability rating. The AMA Guides did not rate conditions with only subjective
symptoms, instead calling for the physician’s exercise of clinical judgment to assess the impairment most
accurately. The court affirmed the board’s opinion and decision after reconsideration.
COMMENTARY:
Page 4 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
The first point in Cannon is that permanent objective medical findings such as seen on an MRI, CT, X-
ray scans or other diagnostic studies are not necessarily required in order to provide a WPI rating for a
medical condition under the AMA Guides. Secondly, using an alternative rating method to calculate a
WPI rating in a given case is not limited to cases that are complex or extraordinary.
■ ERIC PASQUOTTO, APPLICANT v. HAYWARD LUMBER, CONNECTICUT INDEMNITY INSURANCE
COMPANY, ATHENS ADMINISTRATORS (ADJUSTING AGENT), DEFENDANTS
W.C.A.B. Nos. GRO 0028123, GRO 0028394—WCJ Michael D. LeCover (GRO); WCAB En Banc:
Chairman Miller, Commissioners Rabine, O’Brien, Cuneo, Murray, Caplane, Brass (concurring)
Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board (en banc)
71 Cal. Comp. Cases 223; 2006 Cal. Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 35
Opinion Filed February 27, 2006
HEADNOTES: Permanent Disability—Apportionment—Compromise and Release—WCAB held en banc
that order approving compromise and release, without more, is not “prior award of permanent disability”
within meaning of Labor Code § 4664(b). [See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’ Comp.
2d §§ 8.05[1], [2][a], [c], 8.06[5][a], 29.01[2].]
Permanent Disability—Apportionment; Compromise and Release—WCAB held en banc that, when there is
no “prior award of permanent disability” within meaning of Labor Code § 4664(b), medical reports and other
evidence relating to prior industrial injury that was settled by compromise and release still may be relevant
in determining whether any permanent disability found after subsequent industrial injury was caused by
“other factors” under Labor Code § 4663. [See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’ Comp.
2d §§ 8.05[1], [2][a], [c], 8.06[5][a], 29.01[2].]
Permanent Disability—Apportionment—Compromise and Release—WCAB held en banc that concept of
medical rehabilitation from prior industrial disability remained viable under Labor Code § 4663, although,
even if injured employee had medically rehabilitated from prior industrial disability, this did not necessarily
preclude prior industrial injury from being “other factor” causing employee’s subsequent disability. [See
generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’ Comp. 2d §§ 8.05[1], [2][a], [c], 8.06[5][a], 29.01[2].]
CASE SUMMARY: The Appeals Board has held en banc that an order approving a compromise and
release, without more, is not a “prior award of permanent disability” within the meaning of Labor Code
§ 4664(b). In that case, nowhere in the compromise and release or in the addendum was there any
stipulation or representation by the parties as to the percentage of permanent disability—or the factors of
disability—caused by the injury. Moreover, held the Board, no evidence extrinsic to the four corners of the
approved compromise and release agreement should be allowed in an attempt to show that some discrete
portion of the settlement was for permanent disability. Additionally, the Board held that, when there is no
“prior award of permanent disability” within the meaning of Labor Code § 4664(b), medical reports and
other evidence relating to the prior industrial injury that was settled by compromise and release still may be
relevant in determining whether any permanent disability found after the subsequent industrial injury was
caused by “other factors” under Labor Code § 4663(c). Finally, the Board pointed out that the concept of
medical rehabilitation from a prior industrial disability remained viable under Labor Code § 4663, although,
even if an injured employee had medically rehabilitated from a prior industrial disability, this did not
necessarily preclude the prior industrial injury from being an “other factor” causing the employee’s
subsequent disability.
COMMENTARY:
The WCAB in Pasquotto is dealing with three separate issues regarding a Compromise and Release:
1. The Compromise and Release is silent on the amount of permanent disability.
Page 5 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
2. The Compromise and Release is silent on permanent disability, but there may be extrinsic evidence
of what the permanent disability rating would have been.
3. The Compromise and Release indicates the amount of permanent disability.
The WCAB indicates that a compromise and release is not a “prior award” for the purpose of
apportionment pursuant to Labor Code § 4664. Even if the defendant has extrinsic evidence of what the
permanent disability rating was that formed the basis of the compromise and release settlement, the
settlement is not considered a “prior award,” and extrinsic evidence of the permanent disability is not
allowed. Parties resolve cases by compromise and release for a variety of reasons, sometimes regardless
of the amount of permanent disability that forms the basis of a settlement. The relationship between any
prior permanent disability ratings or medical reports that led to a compromise and release and use of that
evidence later to reduce a current permanent disability rating as a result of the presumption in Labor Code
§ 4664 is tenuous at best. It is too speculative to allow evidence of permanent disability underlying a prior
compromise and release to give rise to a presumption of a prior award.
The WCAB did not address item #3 above in its decision in Pasquotto because the commissioners could
not muster a majority opinion about whether indicating a permanent disability amount in a compromise and
release is sufficient evidence of a “prior award.” In some parts of the state, defense counsel routinely wrote
the basis of the compromise and release was a specific percentage of permanent disability, while in other
parts of the state, no one wrote anything about permanent disability, other than a statement, oral or written,
that said that the permanent disability “was based upon the report of Dr. X.”
The message here is that if you have a prior compromise and release involving the same body part or body
region, you still have Labor Code § 4663 apportionment that occurs without the presumption of a prior
award. Obtaining prior medical reports from the case that led to the compromise and release is essential
for defendant to develop the record to prove “other factors” are causing permanent disability in a current
claim. The medical reports that underlie the prior compromise and release are discoverable and can serve
as evidence of those “other factors” pursuant to Escobedo. In Pasquotto, the defendant does not get the
presumption of a prior award that it does in prior cases with a Findings and Award or Stipulated Award.
■ ED KOPPING, PETITIONER v. WORKERS’ COMPENSATION APPEALS BOARD, CALIFORNIA
HIGHWAY PATROL, RESPONDENTS
Civil No. C051885
Court of Appeal, Third Appellate District
142 Cal. App. 4th 1099, 48 Cal. Rptr. 3d 618, 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1229
Opinion Filed September 11, 2006
PRIOR HISTORY: W.C.A.B. No. SAC 321548—WCJ Joseph S. Samuel (SAC); WCAB Panel:
Commissioners Brass, Caplane, Rabine
HEADNOTES: Permanent Disability—Apportionment—Presumption—Court of Appeal held that WCAB
correctly determined that, pursuant to Labor Code § 4664(b), applicant was not entitled to prove that he
was medically rehabilitated from prior permanent disability when he sustained subsequent industrial injury,
when Court of Appeal found that legislature intended statute’s presumption to be conclusive, not
rebuttable, notwithstanding second sentence in statute, which states that this presumption affects burden
of proof. [See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and Workers’ Comp. 2d §§ 8.05[1], [2][c], 8.06[5][a].]
Permanent Disability—Apportionment—Overlap—Burden of Proof—Court of Appeal, annulling decision of
WCAB, held that WCAB incorrectly determined that applicant had burden of disproving overlap between
current permanent disability and previous disability in order to establish his claim to permanent disability
benefits, when Court of Appeal found that defendant, while able to rely, pursuant to Labor Code § 4664(b),
on conclusive presumption that applicant’s permanent disability that was subject of prior award exists at
time of subsequent industrial injury, nonetheless had burden of proving overlap in order to establish its
right to apportionment of applicant’s permanent disability. [See generally Hanna, Cal. Law of Emp. Inj. and
Workers’ Comp. 2d §§ 8.05[1], [2][c], [3], 8.06[5][a], [d], 8.07[2][a]–[c].]
CASE SUMMARY: Respondent Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board concluded that petitioner claimant
was not entitled to prove he was medically rehabilitated from his prior permanent disability when he
sustained a subsequent industrial injury. The claimant petitioned for a writ of review of WCAB’s decision.
Page 6 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
The claimant sustained two back injuries while working for the California Highway Patrol. The court
concluded that WCAB did not err in determining that under Labor Code § 4664(b), the claimant was not
entitled to prove he was medically rehabilitated from his prior permanent disability when he sustained the
subsequent industrial injury. However, WCAB erred in determining that the claimant had the burden of
disproving overlap between his current permanent disability and his previous disability in order to establish
his claim to permanent disability benefits. Instead, the State Compensation Insurance Fund, the adjusting
agency for respondent employer, had the burden of proving overlap between the current disability and the
previous disability in order to establish its right to apportionment of the claimant’s permanent disability. The
employer was entitled to avoid liability for the claimant’s current permanent disability only to the extent the
employer carried its burden of proving that some or all of the claimant’s disability overlapped with the prior
disability and was therefore attributable to the prior industrial injury, for which the employer was not liable.
WCAB’s decision was annulled, and the case was remanded for further proceedings.
COMMENTARY:
This decision makes a lot of sense when you read Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664 in conjunction with
Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc decision). In
Escobedo, the WCAB en banc stated that the applicant has the burden of proving the overall
permanent disability and then the burden of proof shifts to the defendant to prove apportionment. It
makes sense that once the defendant proves the existence of a prior award, i.e., a Findings and Award
or Stipulated Award, it is conclusively presumed that the prior permanent disability still exists, and the
applicant is precluded from providing evidence that he or she has rehabilitated from the prior
permanent disability. Remember, you cannot prove rehabilitation from a prior permanent disability
award under Labor Code § 4664, but you still may be able to prove rehabilitation if there is no prior
award and under the principles of apportionment under Labor Code § 4663.
The opinion also makes sense to place the burden of proving overlap on the defendant, and not on the
applicant, since the defendant has the burden of proof for all aspects of apportionment. The flaw in the
Strong decision was to place the burden of proof on the applicant to prove there are no overlapping
disabilities between the current permanent disability and the prior one. It is extremely difficult to prove
that something did not happen, rather than to prove something did happen. Now, under Kopping, the
burden of proving apportionment is on the correct party, i.e., the defendant, and the irreconcilable
language about presumptions has been resolved not under the Evidence Code, but under common law
and common sense.
The court in Kopping discusses overlapping disabilities under the 1997 Rating Schedule. Even though
the AMA Guides apply under strict objective measurements and descriptions of impairments within a
region or sub-region of the body, it is possible that the issue of “overlapping” disabilities will still occur
in those cases. Hypothetically, an applicant could have a prior award under the AMA Guides for 3%
WPI due to two partial meniscectomies to the right knee from a prior injury that results in an award of
6% permanent disability. Thereafter, and more than five years later, the applicant has a right knee
replacement resulting in a 20% WPI (due to a “fair” result) [see AMA Guides, Chapter 17, Tables 17-33
and 17-35, pages 546 and 549, respectively] and a 26% permanent disability rating. Under Kopping,
the 6% is subtracted, unless the direct cause of the permanent disability in the subsequent injury is the
knee replacement itself, and not the prior meniscus surgeries.
[2] Noteworthy Panel Decisions
[a] Apportionment
Ortega v. Building Technologies, Inc., 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 395
Permanent Disability; Apportionment; AMA Guides. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s finding that applicant
installation/repair technician suffered 55 percent permanent disability as result of 10/21/2004 industrial right
Page 7 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
eye injury causing almost total blindness, and issued new decision finding that applicant’s injury caused 70
permanent disability and entitlement to life pension, when applicant suffered subsequent nonindustrial
injury to his left eye due to glaucoma and cataract, and WCAB found that (1) because left and right eyes
are inherently intertwined and work together as one system, AMA Guides heavily skews impairment of
visual system to measurement of binocular vision, (2) due to unique nature of eye impairment, combined
awards of permanent disability for successive injuries pursuant to Wilkinson v. W.C.A.B. (1977) 19 Cal. 3d
491, 138 Cal. Rptr. 696, 42 Cal. Comp. Cases 406, 564 P.2d 848, although generally not permitted, are
allowed to determine disability due to successive eye injury, (3) to apportion disability pursuant to Labor
Code § 4663 where, such as here, successive industrial and nonindustrial injuries combine to cause
impairment to binocular vision, evaluator must determine disability of vision system as whole, then
determine what, if any, disability resulted from nonindustrial injury alone, and then subtract nonindustrial
disability from disability of whole vision system, (4) in determining apportionment of binocular vision,
evaluator must specifically determine whether applicant would have binocular vision impairment but for
industrial injury, (5) here, although vision in applicant’s left eye worsened over time, applicant’s left eye
condition would not have resulted in permanent impairment of applicant’s binocular vision without near total
loss of vision to right eye and, therefore, binocular impairment from both eyes was industrial, and (6)
reporting of qualified medical evaluator Armin Vishteh, M.D., upon which WCJ relied, did not constitute
substantial evidence because Dr. Vishteh improperly adjusted applicant’s left eye monocular measurement
and binocular measurements, believing that this would ameliorate any increase in applicant’s disability
caused by left eye, but because eyes are intertwined adjustment was inappropriate; WCAB recalculated
permanent disability under Chapter 12.4 of AMA Guides (applicable where there is impairment to both
visual acuity and visual field) using values determined by Dr. Vishteh for applicant’s right eye and binocular
vision, both of which were industrially injured.
[b] Combined Values Chart
Sanchez, Applicant v. California Department of Corrections & Rehabilitation, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp.
P.D. LEXIS 482
Permanent Disability; Rating; Combined Values Chart. WCAB, affirming WCJ, held that there was good
cause to reopen applicant youth counselor’s prior stipulated award of 67 percent permanent disability for
new and further disability caused by left atrial enlargement, and that WCJ did not err by adding additional
21 percent permanent disability (based on 10 percent whole person impairment described by agreed
medical examiner Gerald Markovitz, M.D.) caused by left atrial enlargement, rather than combining
permanent disability ratings using Combined Values Chart, when WCAB reasoned that, while strict
application of Combined Values Chart is prima facie evidence of level of disability, evidence may be
rebutted by substantial evidence showing that different method of combining multiple impairments results in
more accurate rating of disability, and WCAB believed that in this case finding of 88 percent permanent
disability by adding impairments was supported by substantial medical evidence consisting of Dr.
Markovitz’s opinions regarding combined effect of applicant’s medical conditions on his future, including
increased risk of sudden death, and WCAB was persuaded that adding ratings for final rating of 88 percent
most accurately reflected applicant’s true level of permanent disability.
[c] Ratings Under the AMA Guides
Cortez v. The Regents of the University of California Riverside, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 377
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant police officer who
incurred industrial injury in form of skin cancer (basal cell carcinoma) to his face/right cheek while employed
by defendant between 12/31/94 and 3/5/2012 suffered 25 percent permanent disability, with 90 percent
apportioned to industrial cause and 10 percent to other factors, based upon reporting of applicant’s treating
physician, Samer Alaiti, M.D., when Dr. Alaiti relied on AMA Guides criteria for dermatologic disorders in
Table 8-2 and determined that applicant fell within criteria for Class 2 impairment, which includes “Skin
disorder signs and symptoms present or intermittently present and limited performance of some activities of
daily living and may require intermittent to constant treatment,” and WCAB found that although panel
qualified medical evaluator Howard Sofen, M.D., concluded that applicant fell within Class 1 (which includes
Page 8 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
“no or few” limitations of activities of daily living), Dr. Alaiti disagreed given that applicant was limited in
some activities of daily living based on many prophylactic conditions imposed on applicant as result of
injury and need for applicant to avoid undue exposure to sunlight, that Dr. Alaiti and Dr. Sofen agreed that
applicant would require intermittent treatment in form of yearly dermatology examinations and may require
intermittent biopsy of suspicious lesions, and that Dr. Alaiti set forth sufficient reasoning for his impairment
finding pursuant to AMA Guides and Blackledge v. Bank of America (2010) 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 613
(Appeals Board en banc opinion), and his opinion constituted substantial evidence.
Gomez v. United Pallet Services, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 381
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s finding that applicant laborer suffered
21 percent permanent disability as result of admitted injury to his right hand and alleged injury to both
hands and wrists on 10/11/2011 and concluded that applicant’s injury caused 6 percent whole person
impairment (10 percent permanent disability) based on qualified medical evaluator Christopher Chen,
M.D.’s, initial application of AMA Guides rating applicant’s impairment due to grip loss, when Dr. Chen’s
analogy to hernia impairment using Table 6-9, Class 2 to find 13 percent impairment in his supplemental
report was insufficient under Almaraz v. Environmental Recovery Services/Guzman v. Milpitas Unified
School District (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), and Milpitas Unified
School Dist. v. W.C.A.B. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp.
Cases 837, because Dr. Chen did not explain how Table 6-9 more accurately reflected applicant’s
impairment than grip loss, and that although WCJ raised defendant’s failure to seek clarification of Dr.
Chen’s opinion, applicant carried burden of proof to justify rebuttal of strict rating using AMA Guides, and
applicant also declined to seek clarification from Dr. Chen.
Greene v. Central Parking Systems, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 283
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB, in split panel opinion, affirmed WCJ’s finding that
applicant incurred 75 percent permanent disability after apportionment as result of 5/14/2008 industrial
injuries to his ankles, right foot, pelvis, psyche, bladder, and in form of erectile dysfunction, and that
reporting of applicant’s primary treating physician, William Mouradian, M.D., constituted substantial
evidence under principles in Almaraz v. Environmental Recovery Services/Guzman v. Milpitas Unified
School District (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), and Milpitas Unified
School Dist. v. W.C.A.B. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp.
Cases 837, to rebut strict AMA Guides impairment rating, when majority WCAB panel, while noting that
strict reading of AMA Guides (particularly Table 17-2 at p. 526) precludes combination of gait impairment
with other impairment for lower extremities in determining overall impairment, concluded that Dr.
Mouradian’s combination of gait derangement with range of motion, ankle strength and sensory loss ratings
on lower extremities most accurately reflected applicant’s overall impairment within four corners of AMA
Guides and was supported by reporting of panel qualified medical evaluator Barry Braiker, M.D., who also
combined gait derangement with other lower extremity impairments, and with applicant’s credible
testimony; Commissioner Zalewski, dissenting from majority panel, concluded that neither Dr. Mouradian’s
reports nor reports of Dr. Braiker constituted substantial evidence to rebut strict application of AMA Guides
prohibiting combination of gait derangement with other lower extremity impairments, because both doctors
combined applicant’s gait derangement with other impairments of his lower extremities without explaining
why they departed from strict application of AMA Guides or why their impairment findings more accurately
depicted applicant’s level of disability, and Commissioner Zalewski believed that since there was insufficient
medical evidence upon which to base permanent disability finding, WCAB had duty to further develop
medical record on Almaraz/Guzman issue notwithstanding that defendant filed declaration of readiness to
proceed.
Hobbs v. County of Los Angeles, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 451
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s award of 61 percent permanent
disability to applicant custody assistant who suffered cumulative injury to her neck, psyche and in form of
headaches during period ending 3/28/2008 and, while finding that WCJ was correct in rejecting alternative
analysis of orthopedic agreed medical examiner Steven Silbart, M.D., with regard to applicant’s cervical
spine impairment, returned matter to trial level to afford Dr. Silbart opportunity to offer medical opinion
compliant with standards set forth in Almaraz v. Environmental Recovery Services/Guzman v. Milpitas
Unified School District (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), aff’d sub nom.
Page 9 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. W.C.A.B. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75
Cal. Comp. Cases 837, when WCAB reasoned that, in keeping with its duty to develop record and Dr.
Silbart’s role as agreed medical examiner, Dr. Silbart should be afforded opportunity to further explain why
he believes scheduled AMA Guides rating does not accurately reflect applicant’s impairment, and should be
given chance to provide rating method within four corners of AMA Guides which more accurately describes
applicant’s impairment level.
Ibarra v. C.W. Brower, Inc., 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 417
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant order selector who
suffered admitted industrial right shoulder injury on 11/29/2011 incurred 34 percent permanent disability
based on opinion of panel qualified medical evaluator, Jerome Robson, M.D., when Dr. Robson found
shoulder impairment under AMA Guides using range of motion method combined with grip loss, and WCAB
concluded that Dr. Robson’s opinion constituted substantial evidence pursuant to Almaraz v. Environmental
Recovery Services/Guzman v. Milpitas Unified School District (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (Appeals
Board en banc opinion), and Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. W.C.A.B. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th
808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837, and under Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal.
Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), to support permanent disability finding, as Dr. Robson
examined applicant, took accurate history and framed his opinion in terms of reasonable medical probability
based upon his expertise, Dr. Robson was able to stay within four corners of AMA Guides and explained
that applicant had grip loss related to his shoulder and elbow instability, and defendant did not produce any
evidence that applicant’s prior hand injury caused any grip loss or permanent disability.
Lee v. Physicians Associates of Greater San Gabriel, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 389
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant claims examiner
who suffered industrial injury to her left thumb, left shoulder and spine during period 10/24/2000 through
10/6/2006 incurred 19 percent permanent disability based on DEU rating which, at WCJ’s request, was
calculated using diagnosis-related estimate (DRE) method of assessing spinal disability rather than range
of motion (ROM) method, when WCAB concluded that WCJ did not err in requesting use of ROM method
because there was no evidence of “multi-level” spinal involvement (such as fractures, disc herniations,
stenosis) within meaning of AMA Guides or clear finding of radiculopathy so as to justify application of ROM
method over DRE method, reporting of agreed medical examiner Thomas Shery, M.D., did not constitute
substantial evidence to support application of ROM method, and application of DRE method was supported
by reporting of applicant’s treating physician, Peter Lee, M.D., who determined that DRE method of
calculating disability was appropriate, and, additionally, WCAB found that WCJs have authority under
Blackledge v. Bank of America (2010) 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 613 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), to use
their independent assessment in determining what method of rating to use and to ask that expert rater use
specific rating method selected in rating permanent disability, and that, here, rater’s memorandum to WCJ
listing four criteria supporting use of ROM method was not persuasive because there were no identifiable
factors found by Dr. Shery which triggered use of ROM method based on criteria listed by rater.
More v. SEMA Construction, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 25
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides; Use of Cane. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant
crane operator incurred 41 percent permanent disability as result of 8/2/2009 industrial right knee injury,
based on reports of applicant’s primary treating physician wherein physician found gait disturbance
impairment under Table 17.5(e) of AMA Guides due to applicant’s use of cane “25% of the time” to “full
time,” when Table 17.5(e) describes 20 percent impairment in terms of “routine use” of cane, and WCAB
found that “routine use” falls within parameters identified by primary treating physician’s reports, that
primary treating physician’s reports were substantial evidence to justify finding of permanent disability, and
that fact that applicant admitted that he did not use cane “every moment of every day” did not disprove
“routine use” of cane.
Mumma v. State of California, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 420
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s permanent disability findings in
connection with claims filed by applicant special agent for 6/1/2009 industrial injury to his knees and in
forms of gastro-esophageal reflux disease and diabetes, and for cumulative injury to his left shoulder, left
knee, feet, and in forms of hypertension, gastro-esophageal reflux disease, diabetes, sleep disorder, and
headaches, and remanded matter for further development of medical record to clarify issues raised by rater
Page 10 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
with regard to agreed medical examiners’ impairment findings, when WCAB concluded that WCJ’s findings
could not be affirmed because agreed medical examiners’ assessments were undermined by permanent
disability rater’s suggestion that assessments were inconsistent with AMA Guides, and WCJ disregarded
rater’s opinion, without explanation, although he had specifically asked for it, WCJ’s approach for
determining permanent disability was not consistent with requirements in Blackledge v. Bank of America
(2010) 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 613 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), and, other than general reference to
opinions of agreed medical examiners and stating that he applied his own expertise, WCJ did not
specifically explain why he disregarded rater’s opinion, why he determined that agreed medical examiners’
assessment of impairment were valid under Almaraz v. Environmental Recovery Services/Guzman v.
Milpitas Unified School District (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), aff’d
sub nom. Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. W.C.A.B. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr.
3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837, and how he rated permanent disability.
Ortega v. SBM Site Services, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 396
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant’s industrial injury
to his lumbar, thoracic and cervical spine caused 49 percent permanent disability, without justification for
apportionment, based upon opinion of panel qualified medical evaluator Dr. Dawdy, and despite
defendant’s assertion that Dr. Dawdy’s reporting was insufficient to support permanent disability award,
WCAB concluded that his reporting constituted substantial evidence and was more persuasive than other
medical evidence in record, when Dr. Dawdy utilized AMA Guides DRE Lumbar Category III, DRE Thoracic
Category II and DRE Cervical Category II, respectively, to rate applicant’s lumbar, thoracic and cervical
disabilities, and testified that he conducted three independent measurements in assessing disability, Dr.
Dawdy examined applicant and thoroughly reviewed medical records and diagnostic reports and discussed
results of EMG study, although defendant argued that radiculopathy found by Dr. Dawdy was not verifiable
by EMG, Dr. Dawdy explained that injured workers often report radicular symptoms but test normal on
electrodiagnostic tests, Dr Dawdy’s opinions were consistent with applicant’s testimony describing pain and
discomfort he experienced along his spine, and, after describing applicant’s EMG and MRI results and his
familiarity with Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664, Dr. Dawdy testified that apportioning applicant’s disability in
this case would be speculative.
Perez v. Coachella Valley Printing Group, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 477
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s award of 23 percent permanent
disability for applicant printer’s 9/15/2010 specific injury to his cervical spine, lumbar spine, shoulders,
knees, and digestive tract and 23 percent permanent disability for admitted cumulative injury to same body
parts, and remanded matter for further development of record, when WCJ declined to adopt whole person
impairment assigned by agreed medical examiner Michael Luciano, M.D., for applicant’s knee impairment
into final permanent disability ratings, having concluded that Dr. Luciano did not adequately justify using
Table 15 gait derangement to rate applicant’s impairment, but WCAB, citing Almaraz v. Environmental
Recovery Services/Guzman v. Milpitas Unified School District (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (Appeals
Board en banc opinion), aff’d sub nom. Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. W.C.A.B. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal.
App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837, and noting that AMA Guides are to be
liberally, rather than mechanically, applied by evaluating physician using his or her expertise, believed that
Dr. Luciano’s expert opinion in capacity as agreed medical examiner should have been given deference,
and that rather than provide no permanent disability rating for applicant’s knee injury, WCJ should allow Dr.
Luciano opportunity through supplemental report or deposition to provide more detailed explanation as to
why he used gait derangement to find impairment.
Ramirez v. Space Lok, Inc., 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 9
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s finding that applicant machine
operator incurred 36 percent permanent disability as a result of 7/23/2012 industrial injury to his left
shoulder, left wrist, left thumb, neck, and psyche, and held that applicant’s injuries caused 51 percent
permanent disability in accordance with opinion of panel qualified medical evaluator, Dr. Clive Segil, who
rejected strict AMA Guides whole person impairment (WPI) of 1 percent for applicant’s left thumb and found
18 percent WPI based on applicant’s loss of grip strength, and WCAB concluded that, because Dr. Segil
found 18 percent WPI utilizing four corners of AMA Guides, it was error for WCJ to instruct rater to use 1
percent WPI, and that Dr. Segil’s reporting was sufficient to rebut strict AMA Guides WPI pursuant to
Page 11 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
principles in Almaraz v. Environmental Recovery Services/Guzman v. Milpitas Unified School District (2009)
74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), and Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. W.C.A.B.
(Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837, as Dr. Segil
adequately explained that applicant’s disability was best described by grip loss due to extent of thumb
disfigurement following surgery and serious joint problem.
COMMENTARY:
This case is an interesting disagreement between the WCJ and the WCAB panel on how a
physician can provide the most accurate WPI rating. In this case, the PQME failed to provide a
strict rating for the severely injured thumb in his report. Instead, he concluded that grip loss is the
most accurate because of the applicant’s two thumb surgeries and the disfigurement from them.
At his deposition, the PQME gave a strict 1% WPI rating, probably based on loss of motion of the
injured thumb.
In his Report and Recommendation on Petition for Reconsideration, the WCJ properly provided
the order of analysis by a physician to obtain the most accurate WPI ratings: (1) doctor gives a
strict rating, citing the chapter, tables, and measurements in the AMA Guides, (2) states the facts
of the patient’s condition that requires the doctor deviate from the strict rating, (3) provides an
analysis as to how the doctor arrived at the alternative rating, (4) provides and analysis as to why
the departure from the strict rating to the alternative rating is more accurate, and (5) states
whether the doctor’s conclusion is based on reasonable medical probability.
The WCAB panel reviewed the case law, including Milpitas USD v. WCAB (Guzman) [(2010) 187
Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837] and Blackledge v. Bank of
America [(2010) 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 613 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]. The panel
indicates that the case law allows a physician to deviate from strict ratings but the emphasis is for
a physician’s conclusions to constitute substantial medical evidence. Implied in this WCAB panel
decision is that all a physician has to do is indicate in an MMI report that based on a review of the
objective findings, diagnosis, and physical examination of the injured employee, a final rating is
the most accurate even if no strict rating is provided to begin with. Despite this WCAB panel
decision, physicians should follow the WCJ’s instructions above in every case, even if the strict
rating is 1%, 0%, or any other percent and the physician believes an alternative WPI rating is
more accurate.
The other take-away of this case is that the WCAB did not receive an Answer from the defendant.
Counsel should always file an answer to opposing counsel’s Petition for Reconsideration, with
absolutely no exceptions. Regardless of whether you represent the injured worker or defendant,
your representation of your client includes a duty to respond to a Petition for Reconsideration.
Smith v. County of Sacramento, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 205
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant nurse with
cumulative injury to her shoulders during period through 1/6/2011 suffered 79 percent permanent disability
based on analysis under Almaraz v. Environmental Recovery Services/Guzman v. Milpitas Unified School
District (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (Appeals Board en banc opinion), and Milpitas Unified School
Dist. v. W.C.A.B. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases
837, provided by agreed medical examiner, when WCAB found that agreed medical examiner’s opinion
constituted substantial evidence to rebut strict AMA Guides rating as agreed medical examiner explained
why strict application of range of motion impairments in AMA Guides did not accurately reflect applicant’s
shoulder impairment, did not improperly rely on language from 1997 Schedule for Rating Permanent
Disabilities to “achieve desired result,” used his clinical judgment to evaluate applicant’s impairment most
accurately, and used Table 16-3 at p. 439 (conversion table) of AMA Guides appropriately to obtain
impairment that accounted for significant problems applicant experienced with both upper extremities.
Varguez v. I/O Controls Corporation, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 30
Page 12 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s award of permanent disability to
applicant test technician/quality control worker/warehouse worker with industrial injuries to her cervical and
lumbar spines, right shoulder, upper extremities, right lower extremity, and psyche, when WCJ used
description of AMA Guides impairment contained in 8/6/2011 report of orthopedic panel qualified medical
evaluator to calculate permanent disability for applicant’s neck, right and left wrist and low back, description
provided by panel qualified medical evaluator in psychiatry to find psychiatric disability, and found right
shoulder permanent disability based on range of motion measurements contained in 4/21/2011 report of
applicant’s treating physician, and WCAB determined that WCJ properly awarded permanent disability
under AMA Guides within “range of evidence.”
Zendel v. County of Los Angeles, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 244
Permanent Disability; Rating; AMA Guides. WCAB, affirming WCJ, held that agreed medical examiner
Richard Siebold, M.D., did not act improperly by determining applicant’s whole person impairment using
range of motion (ROM) rather than diagnostic-related estimate method, and that Dr. Siebold’s report
constituted substantial evidence, when Dr. Siebold discussed his reasoning for changing to ROM method to
evaluate applicant’s impairments after reviewing additional studies, including cervical and lumbar spine MRI
which revealed changes and protrusions at multiple levels, and stated in his deposition that applicant had
multiple levels of involvement and positive EMG testing for both upper and lower extremities, and in light of
MRI and EMG test results revealing involvement at multiple levels, Dr. Siebold believed that it was
appropriate to determine impairment using ROM method.
County of Los Angeles v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Sweetnam) (2023) 88 Cal. Comp. Cases 304,
2023 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 1
This case covers the controversial issue of whether or not in shoulder injury cases, loss of motion can be
combined with loss of strength, despite the often quoted section in the AMA Guides that says loss of
strength cannot be combined with the loss of motion in the absence of a separate pathophysiological
explanation, quoting the AMA Guides Chapter 16, section 16.8a on page 508. In this case, a county
firefighter alleged cumulative trauma to multiple parts of body including his shoulders. An orthopedic
surgeon appointed by the trial judge pursuant to Labor Code Section 5701 opined that combining both the
loss of motion with the loss of strength provided the most accurate WPI rating in the case because the
injured worker suffered from two distinct pathologies to the shoulder—both the rotator cuff and the
glenohumeral joint, which are separate areas of the shoulder in that one comprises the shoulder girdle
while the other is in the shoulder joint.
[d] Permanent Total Disability
Aima v. Buestad Construction, Inc., 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 62
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant
construction laborer incurred 100 percent permanent disability from industrial cumulative injury to his back,
psyche and in form of sleep and sexual dysfunction during period ending 12/26/2006, without justification
for apportionment, based on applicant’s credible testimony and opinions of agreed medical examiners, Drs.
Taylor (orthopedic) and Lerchin (psychiatric) and opinion of vocational expert selected by applicant,
Malcolm Brodzinsky, which WCAB found more persuasive than reporting of defendant’s vocational expert,
Eugene Van de Bittner, when WCAB found that work restrictions imposed by Drs. Taylor and Lerchin
combined with applicant’s cognitive impairments suffered as side effect of medication he took, including
Percocet, Trazodone, Lyrica, Flexoril, Synecot and Pristiq, made it impossible for applicant to compete in
labor market and caused total loss of future earning capacity pursuant to LeBoeuf v. W.C.A.B. (1983) 34
Cal. 3d 234, 193 Cal. Rptr. 547, 48 Cal. Comp. Cases 587, 666 P.2d 989, that opinions of Drs. Taylor and
Lerchin, as well as reporting of Mr. Brodzinsky, were sufficient to rebut strict AMA Guides impairment under
Ogilvie v. W.C.A.B. (2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624, that
Mr. Van de Bittner’s opinion that there were some areas of labor market in which applicant could perform
was not plausible in light of varied and significant work restrictions and limitations, both physical and
cognitive, that were applicable to applicant according to agreed medical examiners, that Mr. Van de Bittner
unduly minimized effects of applicant’s medication-related cognitive and attention limitations in asserting
Page 13 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
that there were jobs applicant could perform within physical restrictions imposed by Dr. Taylor, and that Mr.
Van de Bittner did not adequately explain how applicant, who Dr. Taylor opined would need to be absent
from work an average of three days per month because of his continuing pain, could satisfy production and
scheduling required of any employer.
Conen v. Blue Star Ready Mix, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 97
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s award of 100 percent
permanent disability to applicant heavy equipment operator who suffered 7/17/2008 industrial injury to his
low back, urological system and psyche, based upon opinions of orthopedic agreed medical examiner
Chester Hasday, M.D., and psychiatric agreed medical examiner Burton Wixen, M.D., who both concluded
that applicant was precluded from returning to gainful employment due to combination of failed back
surgery, opiate dependence, level of depression, and chronic pain, and WCAB found that, even without
vocational analysis, agreed medical examiners’ expertise in discerning applicant’s inability to engage in full-
time employment given physical and mental disabilities caused by his injury justified WCJ’s reliance upon
their opinions to find that applicant was totally permanent disability “in accordance with the fact” under
Labor Code § 4662, absent evidence of vocational feasibility.
Dreher v. Alliance Residential, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 345
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s finding that applicant
live-in maintenance supervisor who suffered 10/19/2009 industrial injury to his neck, right shoulder, right
leg, right hip, right knee, and in forms of gait impairment, headaches and sleep disorder suffered 77 percent
permanent disability, when applicant claimed that he suffered 100 percent permanent disability pursuant to
LeBoeuf v. W.C.A.B. (1983) 34 Cal. 3d 234, 193 Cal. Rptr. 547, 48 Cal. Comp. Cases 587, 666 P.2d 989,
based on opinion of vocational expert Malcolm Brodzinsky and orthopedic agreed medical examiner
Andrew Burt, M.D., and, although WCJ disregarded Dr. Burt’s opinion that applicant was rendered unable
to participate in gainful employment and was not good candidate for vocational rehabilitation because of his
profound level or orthopedic impairment because WCJ found opinion to be outside Dr. Burt’s area of
expertise, WCAB believed that physician may be qualified to provide expert medical opinion as to injured
employee’s ability to participate in vocational rehabilitation, and that record needed further development in
order to clarify Dr. Burt’s opinion regarding whether applicant rebutted scheduled rating in 2005 Permanent
Disability Rating Schedule, and as to whether Dr. Burt’s opinion with respect to applicant’s employability
constituted substantial evidence.
Hipsher v. State of California Department of Corrections & Rehabilitation, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D.
LEXIS 387
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant
correctional officer who suffered industrial injury to his left arm, left shoulder, neck, and psyche was
permanently totally disabled based on his psychological disability notwithstanding possibility that he would
have spinal surgery on some future date, when WCAB found that applicant’s condition was permanent and
stationary despite certification for spinal surgery which applicant may undergo at future time, that any
orthopedic impairment applicant may have suffered was subsumed by applicant’s permanent and total
psychological impairment, that there was no evidence that even successful spinal surgery would improve
applicant’s mental health to point of reducing his permanent disability, and that substantial medical
evidence supported finding that no work restrictions could accommodate applicant’s psychological disability
and that he was permanently totally disabled on that basis.
Kirkwood v. Verizon California, Inc., 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 134
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s award of 100 percent
permanent disability, without apportionment, to applicant operator who suffered industrial injury to her right
upper extremity and psyche from 8/1/2006 to 8/1/2007, and returned matter to WCJ to determine how much
of applicant’s overall disability was attributable to preexisting, nonindustrial left arm injury, how much was
attributable to industrial cumulative injury and whether or not Subsequent Injuries Benefit Trust Fund
(SIBTF) had any liability (which WCAB determined, in interest of judicial economy, should be considered
contemporaneously with permanent disability and apportionment to avoid later re-litigation of issues by
SIBTF), when WCAB found that even though applicant lost use of both hands, conclusive presumption of
100 percent permanent disability in Labor Code § 4662(a) did not apply because applicant did not suffer
injury to both of her hands as result of industrial injury, that applicant’s left arm injury (amputation below
Page 14 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
elbow) predated cumulative industrial injury in this case and preexisting disability cannot be combined with
current industrial injury to justify application of conclusive presumption of permanent total disability, that
holdings in Kaiser Foundation Hospitals v. W.C.A.B. (Dragomir-Tremoureux) (2006) 71 Cal. Comp. Cases
538 (writ denied) and Regents of the Univ. of Calif. V. W.C.A.B. (Siegel) (2011) 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 1237
(writ denied), as relied upon by applicant, did not apply here, and that vocational expert evidence was
insufficient to rebut scheduled rating for applicant’s right upper extremity injury or support finding of 100
percent permanent disability “in accordance with the fact” pursuant to Labor Code § 4662(b) and analysis in
LeBoeuf v. W.C.A.B. (1983) 34 Cal. 3d 234, 193 Cal. Rptr. 547, 48 Cal. Comp. Cases 587, 666 P.2d 989,
and Ogilvie v. W.C.A.B. (2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624,
because vocational expert disregarded impact of applicant’s preexisting, nonindustrial amputation in
analyzing applicant’s diminished future earning capacity and vocational feasibility.
Kirkwood v. Verizon California, Inc., 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 257
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB, denying applicant’s petition for
reconsideration, upheld its prior decision [see Kirkwood v. Verizon California, Inc., 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp.
P.D. LEXIS 134 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)], in which it rescinded WCJ’s unapportioned
award of 100 percent permanent disability and returned matter to WCJ to determine how much of
applicant’s overall disability was attributable to preexisting, non-industrial left arm injury, how much was
attributable to industrial cumulative injury and whether or not Subsequent Injuries Benefit Trust Fund had
any liability, when WCAB found that even though applicant lost use of both hands, conclusive presumption
of 100 percent permanent disability in Labor Code § 4662 did not apply because applicant’s preexisting
disability caused by non-industrial left arm amputation could not be combined with current industrial injury
to justify application of conclusive presumption of permanent total disability.
La Count v. Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transit Authority, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 20
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB, affirming WCJ, held that applicant
cash/relief vault truck driver incurred permanent total disability as result of 11/16/2004 admitted industrial
injury to his neck, back, left shoulder, left wrist, right hip, psyche, gastrointestinal system, and in forms of
diabetes, hypertension and sleep disorder, when WCAB found that (1) unrebutted opinions of agreed
medical examiners in orthopedics, psychiatry and internal medicine, and opinion of agreed vocational
evaluator constituted substantial evidence to support finding of 100 percent permanent disability, (2)
contrary to defendant’s assertion, WCJ properly considered findings of non-industrial apportionment and
still found applicant to be permanently totally disabled even after apportionment, by adding applicant’s
impairment rather than using Combined Values Chart pursuant to opinion of orthopedic agreed medical
examiner that there was synergistic effect to applicant’s orthopedic injuries so that they should be added
rather than combined, and opinion of internal medicine agreed medical examiner that applicant would be
100 percent permanently disabled even after apportionment, and (3) alternatively, applicant was
permanently totally disabled “in accordance with the fact” under Labor Code § 4662, based upon his
inability to compete in open labor market.
Law v. Sierra Pacific Industries, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 355
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant
suffered permanent total disability as result of admitted injuries to his neck, low back and in form of
headaches on 1/7/2000, as well as injuries to other body parts, based upon reports of applicant’s treating
physician, which were most recent reports in record and were most consistent with applicant’s credible
testimony, and agreed with WCJ’s determination that reporting of orthopedic surgeon Andrew Burt, M.D.,
which met new apportionment standards, constituted substantial evidence to support finding that there was
no basis for apportionment of applicant’s disability under Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664.
Noble v. VEC Farms, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 260
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant was
permanently totally disabled from admitted industrial injury to her knees based upon reporting of orthopedic
agreed medical examiner, Henry Edington, M.D., and vocational expert, Bob Rehm, whose opinions were
sufficient to rebut scheduled permanent disability rating pursuant to LeBoeuf v. W.C.A.B. (1983) 34 Cal. 3d
234, 193 Cal. Rptr. 547, 48 Cal. Comp. Cases 587, 666 P.2d 989, and Ogilvie v. W.C.A.B. (2011) 197 Cal.
App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624, when Mr. Rehm concluded that there
were no jobs that applicant could perform and that applicant was not amenable to vocational rehabilitation
Page 15 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
due to applicant’s severe chronic pain, sleep difficulties, medication intake and need to ambulate with four-
point cane, Dr. Edington confirmed Mr. Rehm’s findings and also determined that applicant was significantly
restricted in her activities of daily living, and WCAB rejected defendant’s contention that there was no
expert evidence on effect of applicant’s industrial pain medication on her future earning capacity when Mr.
Rehm found that side effects of applicant’s pain medication impaired her ability to work and engage in
vocational rehabilitation and WCAB found that, as vocational expert, Mr. Rehm was uniquely qualified to
gauge effect medication will have on injured worker’s ability to compete for work or benefit from vocational
rehabilitation, and that is why Dr. Edington deferred consideration of effect of applicant’s medication to
other experts.
Qazi v. The Boeing Company, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 233
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s finding that applicant
precision parts inspector was permanently and totally disabled as result of 4/18/2005 industrial injury to his
lumbar spine, thoracic spine, and in forms of hypertension, diabetes, GERD and obstructive sleep apnea,
based upon evidence of applicant’s total loss of future earning capacity and inability to return to open labor
market, which WCJ found rebutted scheduled rating, when WCAB determined that vocational expert
evidence upon which WCJ relied raised issues regarding whether his findings were based upon
impermissible factors as described in Ogilvie v. W.C.A.B. (2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d
704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624, and whether he failed to consider non-industrial apportionment found in
prior 66 percent permanent disability award, and, additionally, that further proceedings were required as to
whether vocational expert inappropriately relied upon applicant’s lack of cognitive function, which was not
supported by medical evidence, as basis for his finding of applicant’s non-employability, whether applicant
retired due to his industrial injury, and whether applicant decided to limit his employment search to Los
Angeles area or whether such limitation was based on job market considerations.
Van-Hattem v. City and County of San Francisco, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 426
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB rescinded WCJ’s award of 82 percent
permanent disability and awarded applicant deputy sheriff 100 percent permanent disability for 2/5/2002
industrial right knee injury, when WCAB concluded that (1) in awarding permanent disability based on
sedentary work restriction provided by agreed medical examiner David Chittenden, M.D., WCJ improperly
disregarded Dr. Chittenden’s deposition testimony regarding applicant’s restrictions as to days, hours,
necessity for frequent breaks and pain which exceeded criteria for sedentary work and which, when
coupled with finding of applicant’s vocational expert that applicant was unable to compete in open labor
market, constituted substantial evidence to support award of permanent total disability “according to the
fact” under Labor Code §§ 4662(b), (2) WCJ’s finding that applicant could but was unwilling to work was not
supported by substantial evidence considering entire record, which indicated that applicant would have
continued working but was medically unable to work for more than a decade due to his industrial injury and
its effects, (3) applicant’s failure to look for work after his industrial injury or to seek job accommodation
from his employer and his expression of desire to vacation in Mexico with his wife after enduring significant
trauma for many years was reasonable and did not demonstrate unwillingness to return to work as found by
WCJ, and (4) reporting of defense vocational expert upon which WCJ relied did not constitute substantial
evidence to support sedentary work limitation because vocational expert discounted significant work
restrictions imposed by Dr. Chittenden and improperly substituted his own opinion regarding applicant’s
limitations for Dr. Chittenden’s medical opinion.
Whitley v. East Bay Municipal Utility District, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS—
Permanent Disability; Rating; Permanent Total Disability. WCAB affirmed WCJ’s finding that applicant
instrument technician suffered permanent total disability, without basis for apportionment, as result of
4/10/2006 injury to his back and compensable consequence psychiatric injury, based on opinions of
orthopedic and psychiatric agreed medical examiners indicating that applicant was unemployable due to
orthopedic injuries resulting in five surgeries, use of narcotic pain medication and psychiatric impairment,
coupled with opinion of applicant’s vocational expert that applicant was unemployable, when WCAB found
that opinions of agreed medical examiners were substantial evidence under Milpitas Unified School Dist. v.
W.C.A.B. (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837, and
Ogilvie v. W.C.A.B. (2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624, to
rebut strict AMA Guides rating, and that opinion of defendant’s vocational expert regarding applicant’s
Page 16 of 16
§ 6.02 Permanent Disability, Apportionment, and PDRS
potential employability in some occupations was not substantial evidence when considered together with
applicant’s testimony and opinions of agreed medical examiners.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 6.03
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 6
Case Summaries With Commentary and Current Issues Affecting Permanent Disability Ratings
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
[1] Labor Code Section 4660.1(c) Larsen v. Securitas Security Services
In Larsen v. Securitas Security Services [2016 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 237 (Appeals Board noteworthy
panel decision)], the WCAB panel affirmed the WCJ’s findings that the applicant security guard sustained a
compensable psychiatric injury that resulted in 56 percent permanent disability, after apportionment and after
combination with permanent disability to the applicant’s shoulders, and that the applicant’s psychiatric
permanent disability was separately compensable because it resulted from a “violent act” in accordance with
Labor Code § 4660.1(c).
The WCAB panel found that the applicant’s accepted orthopedic and alleged psychiatric injury occurred as a
result of being hit by a car while walking through a parking lot on 2/21/2013. The defendant asserted that being
hit by a car was not a “violent act” under Labor Code § 4660.1 because it was not an act of a criminal or quasi-
criminal nature perpetrated against the applicant. The WCAB panel concluded that, where the Legislature did
not include any language in Labor Code § 3208.3(b) limiting the definition of a “violent act” to either criminal or
quasi-criminal conduct perpetrated against an applicant, for purposes of Labor Code § 3208.3(b), a “violent act”
is not limited solely to criminal or quasi-criminal activity, and may include other acts that are characterized by
either a strong physical force, extreme or intense force, or are vehemently or passionately threatening.
The applicant in this case, who was hit by a car from behind with enough force to cause her to fall, hit her head
and lose consciousness, was a victim of a “violent act” within the definition of Labor Code § 3208.3(b) for
purposes of receiving additional permanent disability for her psychological injury as an exception to Labor Code
§ 4660.1(c).
There are both legal and medical issues in this case that should be addressed. First of all, when you read the
description of the mechanism of injury in the WCAB decision, it is clear that when the Applicant got struck by
the car, she sustained a direct head injury in addition to her orthopedic injuries. Arguably, the debate in this
case about whether or not a vehicle vs. pedestrian collision is a “violent act” under Labor Code § 4660.1(c) is
moot because the post-concussion injury resulting in headaches, dizziness, and memory problems can be
rated as a direct physical injury to the brain under Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides and is not a psyche case as a
consequence of a physical injury.
The whole issue could have been avoided had Dr. Allen rated the case as a direct physical injury to the brain
rather than as a psychiatric injury that arose out of a physical injury. The Applicant’s memory loss, headaches,
depression, and other post-concussion symptoms are ratable under Chapter 13—specifically, Tables 13-5 and
13-6 for the memory loss, Table 13-8 for the depression, Table 13-4 for any sleep disorder, and Table 13-2 for
the headaches. All are based on the post-concussion syndrome. This would have avoided the entire issue
under the Labor Code § 4660.1(c) exclusion of permanent disability for a psychiatric condition that is caused by
a physical injury.
However, from a legal standpoint the WCAB decision makes sense since Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(2)(A) and
Labor Code § 3208.3(b) do not define what a “violent act” is. The WCAB panel seems to be comfortable with its
own conclusion that the term is not defined in either section and can, therefore, conclude that Applicant, who
was “hit from behind with enough force to cause her to fall, hit her head, and lose consciousness” is a victim of
a violent act under Labor Code § 3208.3(b) and the Applicant is entitled to additional permanent disability under
Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(2)(A).
Page 2 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
The WCAB panel went to great lengths to find other statutory references to the term “violent act” to refer to a
broad definition of its use and to limit its application to acts of criminal or quasi-criminal violent acts as the
Defendant had contended. However, Labor Code §§ 3208.3(b) and 4660.1(c)(2)(A) do not have any statutory
requirement for a crime or quasi-criminal act to be part of a “violent act” in an industrial injury for permanent
disability for a psychiatric injury that is a consequence of a physical injury. The WCAB panel logically found that
getting hit by a car is a violent act under the unqualified and undefined use of the term “violent act” within those
applicable Labor Code sections.
The take-away of this case is that the doctor could have completely avoided this issue in the first place by
properly evaluating the case as a direct head injury. Applicant’s attorney may have avoided this appeal if he or
she had deposed Dr. Allen.
[2] Labor Code Section 4662 and Vocational Experts
Labor Code § 4662 was modified by the legislature in AB1847 in 2014. Contrary to popular belief, it was not
amended in SB 863. The older version of Section 4662, adopted in 2007, created the conclusive presumption
of permanent total disability as follows:
Any of the following permanent disabilities shall be conclusively presumed to be total in character:
(a) Loss of both eyes or the sight thereof
(b) Loss of both hands or the use thereof
(c) An injury resulting in a practically total paralysis
(d) An injury to the brain resulting in incurable mental incapacity or insanity.
In all other cases, permanent total disability shall be determined in accordance with the fact. [2007 version]
The 2014 current version of Section 4662 reads as follows:
(a) Any of the following permanent disabilities shall be conclusively presumed to be total in character:
1. Loss of both eyes or the sight thereof
2. Loss of both hands or the use thereof
3. An injury resulting in a practically total paralysis
4. An injury to the brain resulting in permanent mental incapacity.
(b) In all other cases, permanent total disability shall be determined in accordance with the fact. [2014
version]
The intended difference between the two versions of Section 4662 is that cases that rely on “in accordance with
the fact” are not entitled to a conclusive presumption of permanent total disability and apportionment under
Section 4663 may apply.
The first question presented in this article is whether or not in a case that falls under the current version of
Section 4662 for permanent total disability “based on the fact,” counsel is required to produce vocational
rehabilitation evidence that the Applicant is or is not feasible for vocational rehabilitation or if permanent total
disability can be proven without vocational evidence. The second issue presented in this article is to what
extent, if any, are vocational rehabilitation experts required to take into consideration apportionment that is
determined by a medical doctor in these cases? What qualifications should a vocational expert have in these
cases and what issues should be addressed in vocational rehabilitation reports? How has the role of vocational
experts changed in light of the Court of Appeals decision in Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. (Dahl) [(2015) 240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119].
Is vocational rehabilitation evidence necessary in a Labor Code § 4662 “based on the fact” case? The short
answer is “no” if and only if the evaluating physician (an AME or PQME) opine with reasonable medical
probability that the Applicant’s medical condition alone justifies a finding of permanent total disability, inability to
compete in the open labor market, or total loss of future earning capacity, all of which mean the same thing [see
Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 1274–1275, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76
Page 3 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
Cal. Comp. Cases 624]. The physician’s medical conclusions must constitute substantial medical evidence on
the question of the cause of permanent total disability due to the medical condition(s) alone.
In addition, the physician must determine whether or not there is any apportionment of permanent disability
pursuant to Labor Code § 4663. It is clear from a reading of the current version of Section 4662(b) that any case
in which it is claimed that the Applicant is permanently totally disabled “based on the fact” includes the
requirement that the physician address apportionment under Section 4663. This is true even though injuries
resulting in permanent total disability under Labor Code § 4662(a) conclusive presumptions are not subject to
apportionment.
For injuries occurring on or before 2013, Labor Code § 4660 defined permanent disability in part as “diminished
earning capacity” to be determined by RAND studies. For injuries occurring on or after 1/1/13, in Labor Code
§ 4660.1, the definition of permanent disability was eliminated and the 1.4 “adjustment factor” replaced the eight
DFEC rankings. The legislature dropped the definition of permanent disability as “diminished future earning
capacity” from the Labor Code. However, the instructions for the 2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule
(2005 PDRS) indicate on pages 1-2 and 1-3 that a permanent disability rating can range from 0% to 100% and
states: “Permanent total disability represents a level of disability at which an employee has sustained a total
loss of earning capacity. Some impairments are conclusively presumed to be totally disabling. Labor Code
Section 4662.” Despite the elimination of the Diminished Future Earning Capacity (DFEC) eight rankings for
injuries occurring on or after 1/1/13, the PDRS currently in effect still defines permanent total disability as a total
loss of earning capacity.
Case law that has been developed under the 2014 revised version of Labor Code § 4662 “based on the fact”
supports the conclusion that a physician can find that an injured worker has a total loss of earning capacity
based on the medical conditions alone, without the need for vocational expert opinion. In G4 Secure Solutions
v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Simone) [(2015) 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 823 (writ denied)], a WCAB panel
upheld a WCJ’s award of permanent total disability under Labor Code § 4662(b) “based on the fact” wherein
that finding was based solely on the medical evidence from an AME in orthopedic surgery. The date of injury in
this case was in March 2008 but the trial occurred after enactment of AB 1847 in 2014 that revised Labor Code
§ 4662.
In Simone, the Applicant was an armed security guard, employed for five years, who in March 2008 stepped
into a trench causing her hip and lumbar spinal injuries. She had a total hip replacement surgery in 2009 that
failed due to complications from cellulitis, and a lumbar spinal laminectomy, decompression, and fusion in July
2011 that also failed and resulted in a chronic pain syndrome. She has an unstable gait, uses a walker at home
and uses a wheelchair while in public. Based on the totality of her orthopedic residuals, the AME opined that
she cannot compete in the open labor market. It should be noted that the AME also rated the Applicant’s WPI
based on the AMA Guides which ratings were not included in the published opinion. However, the AME testified
in deposition that based solely on the hip and lumbar spine conditions, he opined that the Applicant is
permanently and totally disabled and unable to compete in the open labor market. The WCAB panel upheld the
WCJ’s finding of 100% permanent total disability with no apportionment.
See also Oakland Raiders v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Gilbert) [(2012) [77 Cal. Comp. Cases 457 (writ
denied)]; County of Los Angeles v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (LeComu) [(2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 645
(writ denied)]; Barrett Business Services, Inc. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Gallagher) [(2013) 78 Cal.
Comp. Cases 1318 (writ denied)]. The Gallagher case is a hybrid of a Labor Code § 4662(b) “based on the fact”
case and a rebuttal of the DFEC under Ogilvie because an AME opined that the strict WPI rating of 35% was
not accurate, his impairment rating was somewhere between 39% WPI and 81% WPI, and his three failed back
surgeries and medication created a synergistic effect on his ability to compete in the open labor market plus a
vocational expert opined that the Applicant was not amenable for retraining and 100% totally disabled. In this
case, the AME reviewed the vocational expert’s report and vice versa.
The problem with this case, and others cited in it, is that the jury is out on whether under the 2014 version of
Section 4662, the Applicant needs vocational rehabilitation evidence that the Applicant is not feasible for
retraining even though an evaluating physician opines that the Applicant’s medical condition alone causes
permanent total disability “based on the fact” and the date of injury is on or after 1/1/15. AB 1847 was a spot bill
in which the legislature amended a host of existing laws in various statutes outside and within the Labor Code
and Section 4662 was one change among many in other statutes that have nothing to do with workers’
Page 4 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
compensation law. AB 1847 was not an urgency act but went into effect on January 1, 2015 since the bill was
signed into law by the governor on July 28, 2014.
The cases cited above all involve dates of injuries that pre-date January 1, 2015, the date the revised Section
4662(b) went into effect. If Section 4662(b) applies retroactively to cases pending as of 1/1/15 then the case
law cited above is still good law. It is likely that based on the PDRS definition of permanent total disability, a
vocational expert’s opinion about vocational rehabilitation feasibility is not necessary when the injured worker is
deemed totally disabled by a physician strictly for medical reasons.
Even if the revised version of Section 4662(b) applies only for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/15, the case law
cited above probably still applies because the AME’s conclusions are consistent with the 2005 PDRS definition
of permanent total disability and the current version of Section 4662(b). The only additional element is that the
evaluating physician who opines that the Applicant has a total loss of future earning capacity or who cannot
compete in the open labor market has to determine if there is any apportionment under Section 4663 since
cases under Section 4662(b) are not entitled to the presumption of total disability as they are under Section
4662(a).
Medical determinations of permanent total disability without vocational expert evidence are not without
precedence in other disability determination settings. While proving permanent total disability in a workers’
compensation claim, you are in a parallel universe when proving that a claimant is totally disabled and entitled
to social security disability benefits. In Social Security disability cases, a medical doctor can and will opine that
a claimant for Title II or Title XVI disability benefits “meets the listings” which results in a conclusive
presumption that the claimant is unable to engage in any kind of “substantial gainful activities” which means in
essence, that the person cannot compete in the open labor market due to medically determinable physical
and/or mental impairments [see, e.g., Appendix 1 to Subpart P of Part 404, 20 C.F.R. §§ 404.1571–404.1576 of
the Social Security Act]. If a person “meets the listings” no vocational rehabilitation evidence is needed and the
person then fully qualifies for social security disability benefits. The Applicant in the Simone case cited above,
would meet the listings under Section 1.02 of Subpart P of the Social Security Act [see, e.g., Appendix 1 to
Subpart P of Part 404, Section 1.02 for lumbar spine or joint dysfunctions].
To what extent, if any, are vocational experts required to take into consideration apportionment? A separate
question arises as to whether or not there is a difference between a case that Applicant’s counsel contends falls
under Labor Code § 4662(b) with permanent total disability “based on the fact” as opposed to a case that is
prosecuted under LeBoeuf v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(1983) 34 Cal. 3d 234, 193 Cal. Rptr. 547, 48 Cal.
Comp. Cases 587], which is also referred to as an “Ogilvie Method 3 rebuttal.”
A case prosecuted under Section 4662 does not involve WPI ratings under the AMA Guides at all. As indicated
above, if a doctor opines that an injured worker’s industrially related medical condition(s) result in permanent
total disability, inability to compete in the open labor market, or results in a total loss of earning capacity with no
apportionment then a 100% un-apportioned award can be issued by the WCAB without the need for vocational
evidence.
In contrast, the LeBoeuf/Ogilvie/Dahl cases refer to rebuttal by a vocational expert of the entire permanent
disability rating string including a challenge of the DFEC adjustment factor (or perhaps the 1.4 adjustment factor
for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/13). The hallmark of the current interpretation of Dahl and LeBoeuf cases is
that in order to rebut a rating string, there must be vocational evidence that the Applicant is not amenable to
vocational retraining due to his or her industrial injuries. A LeBoeuf rebuttal may be used to bring a permanent
disability rating string that is under 100% to 100% permanent disability, under the right circumstances. A
LeBoeuf rebuttal has been affirmed in Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl) [(2015) 240
Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119] in which the Court of Appeal indicated that in such a rebuttal,
Applicant must demonstrate with a preponderance of vocational evidence that the Applicant is not amenable for
rehabilitation before a successful rebuttal of a rating string can be accomplished.
If counsel chooses to hire a vocational expert in an Ogilvie Method 3 rebuttal case (that incorporates LeBoeuf),
a vocational expert must address any evaluating physician’s conclusions about apportionment of disability
under Labor Code § 4663. If a physician opines there is apportionment in a Labor Code § 4662(b) “based on
the fact” case, counsel should also hire a vocational rehabilitation expert to opine whether the new injury alone
would have resulted in total loss of earning capacity regardless of the apportionment to a prior injury or other
Page 5 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
factor. His or her failure to do so makes his or her conclusions not substantial expert evidence. In the published
case of Acme Steel v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Borman) [(2013) 218 Cal. App. 4th 1137, 78 Cal. Comp.
Cases 751], the Court of Appeal held that the WCAB must include evidence that considers apportionment of
disability under Labor Code § 4663 when a vocational expert opines that the Applicant is unable to compete in
the open labor market. So in any case in which a vocational expert is rebutting a permanent disability rating
string, he or she must consider whether or not apportionment in the medical evidence affects his or her
conclusions including how and why it does.
In Borman, the Applicant had sustained a prior industrial injury that resulted in a 20% permanent disability
award for hearing loss. He had a subsequent injury in which he suffered a total loss of hearing with 100%
permanent and total disability. The AME determined that 80% of the total disability was due to the new injury
and 20% was due to the old injury. A vocational expert opined that despite the old injury, the new injury resulted
in the Applicant having a total loss of future earning capacity and was 100% disabled.
The vocational expert did not address the fact that the evaluating physician had apportioned 20% of the
permanent disability to the prior injury. Hypothetically a vocational expert could have written in his or her report
the Applicant has a total loss of future earning capacity that was caused solely by his new injury and the old
injury did not affect his ability to work, especially since he did in fact continue to work for the same employer
after the first injury.
The take-away in Borman is that if you use a vocational expert, you must have the expert review all of the
medical evidence in the case and comment upon any medical determination of apportionment under Labor
Code § 4663 and how that apportionment affects the vocational expert’s opinion concerning how, when, and
why the injured worker is not amenable to vocational rehabilitation and how the medical apportionment to a
prior award or non-industrial factors affect his or her conclusions.
What qualifications should a vocational expert have in these cases and what issues should be addressed in
vocational rehabilitation reports? Many attorneys who practice workers’ compensation law also practice before
the Office of Disability Adjudication and Review (ODAR) in social security disability cases. In fact, social
security administrative law judges insist on reviewing the medical-legal reports that are generated in a workers’
compensation case that leads to a claim for Title II SSDI or Title XVI SSI disability benefits.
Vocational rehabilitation experts routinely testify live in social security disability cases, as do medical doctors. In
these cases, vocational experts have a sequential step analysis that is driven by the administrative law judge
that is consistent with determination of one’s eligibility for benefits [see Appendix 1 to Subpart P of Part 404 of
the Social Security Act, 20 C.F.R. § 404.1520].
Vocational rehabilitation experts who routinely testify before the administrative law judges at the ODAR offices
are the most qualified vocational experts to testify to challenge a standard permanent disability rating pursuant
to a LeBoeuf/Ogilvie/Dahl rebuttal. The old-school vocational rehabilitation specialists who were used in our
vocational rehabilitation cases prior to 2009 are not generally as qualified as those rehabilitation experts who
have gained experience in both the workers’ compensation and social security disability communities. In
rebutting a rating string under LeBoeuf/Ogilvie/Dahl, a vocational rehabilitation specialist has many issues to
discuss in his or her report before even getting to EDD data and doing a comparison analysis of same or
similarly situated employees to the injured worker. However, any vocational expert MUST first establish that the
Applicant is not amenable to vocational retraining and why.
A vocational expert’s evidence to rebut a standard permanent disability rating follows under the following steps
and involves a combination of factors that are relevant in a social security disability case and in a workers’
compensation case:
• The claimant’s vocational history (past relevant work for the 15 year period prior to the onset of disability
which in our context is the last date the Applicant worked for the defendant employer).
• The past relevant work history includes a description of the level of arduousness of the physical duties of
the jobs, the level of skill needed to become proficient for each job (called a Specific Vocational
Profile), the US Department of Labor Dictionary of Occupational Trades (DOT) codes for each job, and
whether the claimant performed the job as described in the DOT or not [see Subpart P of Part 404 of
the Social Security Act, 20 C.F.R. §§ 404.1562–404.1569a].
Page 6 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
• Whether or not the claimant can perform his or her past relevant work based on a set of hypotheticals that
reflect the claimant’s medically determined physical and/or mental impairments. This information is
based on the conclusions of a treating or evaluating physician and takes into account work restrictions
and WPI ratings.
• Whether the claimant has any transferable skills [see Subpart P of part 404 of the Social Security Act, 20
C.F.R. § 404.1568(d)(1)–(d)(4)]. Transferable skills are skills that can be used in other jobs when the
skilled or semi-skilled work activities performed in the past 15 years can be used in other available
jobs. Transferability of skills requires analysis of three factors: (1) The same or lesser degree of skill is
required, (2) The same or similar tools and machines are used, and (3) The same or similar raw
materials, products, processes, or services are involved [see Subpart P of part 404 of the Social
Security Act, 20 C.F.R. § 404.1568(d)(1)–(d)(4)]. Also, special rules apply if the claimant is over 55
years (“of advanced age”) or 60 years or older (“retirement age”).
• If so, can the claimant perform any job using his or her transferrable skills? If not, why not?
• Is the claimant amenable to vocational rehabilitation? If not, why not?
• Can the claimant perform any sedentary unskilled work if under 60 years of age? “Sedentary unskilled
work” means lifting up to 20 pounds occasionally, 10 pounds frequently; sitting or standing options for 6
out of 8 hours, with basic simple tasks.
• If the answer is “no” the claimant wins SSDI or SSI benefits.
• If the answer is “yes”, what jobs are available in the national, regional, and local economy that the
claimant can perform?
• In the context of the workers’ compensation vocational evidence, a vocational rehabilitation expert should
be asked to review the treating or evaluating physician’s Return To Work and Voucher, DWC form
10333.36 which essentially is a residual functional capacity assessment by the physician when the
Applicant is MMI as to all parts of body claimed.
• Using EDD data, what loss of earning capacity has the Applicant had over a three year period post injury
(or, arguably, three years post P&S/MMI date) compared to non-injured employees who are similarly
situated?
• How does a physician’s finding of apportionment of permanent disability affect the vocational expert’s
conclusions concerning the Applicant’s loss of earning capacity? Has the injured worker lost 80% of his
earning capacity in a case in which he has 100% disability with 20% apportionment to non-industrial
factors or a prior award?
• Or, would the Applicant have lost 100% of his or her future earning capacity regardless of any
apportionment between two or more injuries? If so, how and why?
The best example is when there are two injuries to the low back. The first injury resulted in a herniated lumbar
disc at L5-S1 but when treated conservatively (medications, ESIs, physical therapy), the Applicant is released
to return to his or her usual and customary duties which are moderately arduous.
Then the Applicant has a second injury to the same level of his or her spine (either by way of a specific injury or
cumulative trauma). The Applicant has lumbar spinal surgery that fails—either there is a development of
arachnoiditis or a chronic lumbar pain syndrome occurs and the Applicant has to use a walker and wheelchair
to ambulate. Hypothetically, there is apportionment between the two injuries and possible non-industrial factors
but the evidence could indicate the 100% total disability is from the failed surgery and it is impossible to parcel
out apportionment of the 100% PD between the two separate injuries.
If, on the other hand, the evaluating or treating physician opines that 80% of the permanent total disability is
due to the second injury and 20% is due to the earlier specific injury then the question becomes whether or not
a vocational expert could present competent evidence that the sole cause of the total loss of earning capacity
was due to the second injury since the Applicant was able to return to his or her usual and customary
occupation until the second injury occurred.
Page 7 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
This analysis can and should be used in the context of a workers’ compensation case in which Applicant is
utilizing a vocational expert opinion by report to rebut a rating string or under Section 4662(b) where there is
apportionment by a physician for medical reasons. The most important factor here is that all vocational experts
must take into consideration in their conclusions the medical apportionment finding under Labor Code § 4663
by the treating and evaluating physicians.
Finally, can counsel utilize vocational expert opinion in order to increase a permanent disability rating that is
less than 100% to a higher rating that is less than 100% permanent total disability? In dicta, the Court of Appeal
in Dahl expressed its doubt that an Applicant can successfully rebut a permanent disability rating string in order
to increase the award based on a different loss of future earnings projection caused by the industrial injury.
However, the Court did not specifically address the issue in Dahl since the vocational rehabilitation expert failed
to indicate that the Applicant was not amenable to retraining. The Court did not expressly reverse any of the
three rebuttal methods described in Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262,
1274–1275, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624]. However, the Court in Dahl seems to have
confused the three methods of rebuttal described by the Court in Ogilvie by focusing only on a rebuttal under
LeBoeuf rather than an Ogilvie rebuttal method that addresses the DFEC adjustment.
The take-aways here are for counsel to always be aware of the need to prove that an injured worker is not
amenable for retraining as the first element to prove a higher permanent disability rating to rebut the DFEC
adjustment or perhaps the “adjustment factor.” Secondly, the Applicant bears the burden in a Labor Code
§ 4662(b) or any kind of LeBoeuf case to show that apportionment of permanent disability by a medical
physician has been considered by any vocational expert opinion. Finally, the evaluating physicians should
always review a vocational expert’s opinion and vice versa.
[3] Medical Marijuana Current Research
Marijuana is used medicinally or recreationally once a year by at least 128 million people in the world since
2012 according to global epidemiology studies. Growing up in California means easy access to marijuana from
elementary school through college and beyond. The “high” from marijuana brings on feelings of euphoria,
laughter, great creativity, and deep philosophical conversations about nothing. Finally, there are the
“munchies.” Does any of this sound familiar to you?
The use of medical marijuana has been legal in the State of California since 1996 when the California
legislature approved legislation allowing for it [see Health & Safety Code §§ 11362.7–11362.83]. Since then, no
regulations have been implemented state wide to control the cultivation, quantity, quality, or distribution of
medical marijuana. It wasn’t until the close of the legislative session in 2015 that a state agency was created by
the legislature to regulate medical and eventually recreational marijuana. The Medical Cannabis Cultivation
Program under the State of California Department of Food and Agriculture was passed by the legislature and
effective February 1, 2016 [see Health & Safety Code § 11362.77].
Most states and the District of Columbia allow medical use of marijuana. The State of Colorado was the first
jurisdiction in the world that legalized the recreational use of marijuana.
What are the implications for the legalization for recreational use of marijuana? What research has been
conducted on the medical use of marijuana? How does the legalization movement affect the rights and
obligations of injured workers, employees in general, and employers? How much do we know about impaired
driving for a person who is high on marijuana? This article will discuss these and many more issues in the
context of what we currently know about the medical use of marijuana and the social, occupational, and
personal effects on legalization for recreational use. For example, has Maximus Federal Services allowed the
use of medical marijuana in a California workers’ compensation claim? The answer is “yes” and will be
discussed later in this article.
Believe it or not, there is very little reliable research on the medical or recreational use of marijuana despite the
fact that the weed has been used for over 5,000 years! The problem is in the federal Controlled Substances Act
[21 U.S.C.S. § 812] which identifies marijuana as a Schedule I controlled substance—the same level as
cocaine, heroin, and methamphetamine. Under federal law, a Schedule I controlled substance is considered to
have no medical use, is subject to abuse, and is illegal to manufacture, sell, possess, or distribute. The National
Institutes of Health (NIH) has one marijuana growing operation that is strictly regulated with limited access to
Page 8 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
researchers. As far as NIH is concerned, until Congress passes legislation that declares marijuana something
other than a Schedule I controlled substance, there will always be limited federally funded research.
The reason marijuana was designated by Congress to be a Schedule 1 controlled substance is because of the
illegal importation of thousands of kilograms (in bricks of 2.2 lbs.) from outside the United States, creating
interstate transport of marijuana in an uncontrolled, unregulated, and illicit underground economy that
originated from Central and South America. Foreign drug cartels have been the primary source for illicit
importation of marijuana with very little domestically grown and processed in comparison. There is no
consistency or quality assurance of marijuana products illegally imported into the United States. No one can
say what insecticides, herbicides, or water quality were used to grow and cultivate marijuana exported into the
United States by illicit growers.
In fact, most public and private university research institutes do not even apply for grants involving marijuana
research for fear of losing funding for all federally funded medical research. That’s right, public and private
institutions have a fear of losing federal research funds if research is conducted on a Schedule I controlled
substance. Congress is slow to act on the need to reclassify marijuana as a Schedule II controlled substance
so that proper research on marijuana can be conducted without the fear of losing federal funding for other
research. As you will see in this article, much research on marijuana has been conducted outside the United
States and the validity and reliability of the research can easily be questioned.
As of the current state of affairs, marijuana remains a Schedule I controlled substance. If a person grows 100 or
more marijuana plants, he or she is guilty of a serious federal felony for which punishment is five years in
federal prison (there is no time off for good behavior in a federal prison sentence). Therefore, marijuana is a
cash industry—banks in the United States are federally chartered and can lose their charter if deposits are
made from sales of a Schedule I substance. So how does a claims administrator in a workers’ compensation
case pay reimbursement for medical marijuana for a chronic pain patient who has a recommendation for
treatment from his or her physician? It cannot be paid by check to the dispensary by the claims administrator.
Marijuana consists of 400 compounds, some of which are psycho-active and others are not. The psycho-active
component of marijuana is Delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (“THC”) from the female cannabis sativa hemp plant
that causes the “high” associated with marijuana use. By smoking marijuana, the psycho-active effect begins in
less than 10 minutes and lasts about four hours before it wears off. If a person eats an “edible” the effect begins
in 30 minutes after ingestion and lasts up to six hours. Generally, edible marijuana causes a stronger high that
is more intense than smoking it. A person cannot die of an overdose of marijuana but emergency rooms are
seeing an increase in patients who have ingested too much and have severe symptoms.
In addition to THC, marijuana has about 100 cannabinoids, some of which may have some medicinal value. Of
the cannabinoids, there are two types—cannabidiols and cannabinols. Marinol is one synthetic form of THC
and is one of a few cannabinoids that is legally prescribed in the United States for medical use. Marinol is
prescribed for HIV and cancer patients to enhance their appetites that are suppressed by the disease process
itself or by chemotherapy, and for children with severe epilepsy or for people with severe spinal cord injuries
that cause paralysis and spasticity. Medical marijuana other than Marinol cannot be “prescribed” by a physician
in the United States—a physician can only “recommend” marijuana. The distinction between prescribing and
recommending medical marijuana avoids problems with the federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) which
licenses physicians to prescribe scheduled substances. If a doctor recommends medical marijuana in
California, he or she will not run afoul of federal law and regulations that would put at risk their DEA license to
prescribe scheduled drugs for patients.
In addition to Marinol, marijuana in medical form is cannabinoid (CBD), Dronabinol, Nabilone, and Ajulemic
Acid (a non-psychoactive component of marijuana just approved by the FDA in February 2015 for inflammation
from scleroderma). The FDA has approved these forms of marijuana for medical use and can be prescribed by
a physician, as opposed to being “recommended.”
Marijuana use as medicine in a workers’ compensation claim is not in any state’s Medical Treatment Utilization
Schedule (MTUS) and its use as a medicine is not yet considered evidence-based. However, marijuana as a
drug is well tolerated by people in terms of adverse side effects (e.g. it does not affect the heart, respiration, or
any other vital signs; you cannot die from an overdose), there are virtually no known drug to drug adverse
interactions, and there is no strong evidence of harm with long term use. But at the same time, there are no
Page 9 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
randomized clinical trials (RCTs) that compare marijuana with concurrent use of opioids, benzodiazepines, or
hypnotics. In fact, there are no randomized clinical placebo controlled trials comparing inert marijuana with
psychoactive marijuana for medical use.
Anecdotal evidence exists that marijuana helps people who suffer from chronic pain. However, there is no
randomized clinical trial that compares the effects of marijuana with psychoactive THC and marijuana without
THC. Any study that holds any scientific weight would have to be sponsored by the National Institutes of Health
rather than from the marijuana industry or from any other interested sources (including but not limited to pain
management physicians). There has not been any significant study where chronic pain patients only use
medical marijuana or a placebo and no other medications. CBD oil, derived from the marijuana plant, which
does not have THC or any other psychoactive agent has been shown to help with muscle cramps and general
muscle soreness.
So far, we know very little about how marijuana that ends up being sold in a dispensary was cultivated. We do
not know what pesticides and herbicides were sprayed on the marijuana crop. We do know that it takes lots of
water to grow marijuana and in most cases, the water quality used to grow the crop is unknown and
unregulated. Hypothetically, medical marijuana is supposed to be grown in small quantities by a cooperative or
by individuals for individual use. But anyone who walks into a marijuana dispensary will not know how or where
any given pot was grown.
Since there are no regulations on the production or distribution of medical marijuana, we do not know the
strength or “dose” of any given marijuana, nor is there any quality control over the type of marijuana one can
obtain through a dispensary. Something may be labeled “sativa” or “indigo” but there is no quality guarantee
over exactly what a patient is buying. If legalization for recreational use passes, perhaps state-wide regulations
will cure this lack of quality control from seed to distribution. There would have to be genetic and other
confirmation of type and quality of medical marijuana in terms of purity, dose specific, and type of psychoactive
effect. After all, when you take a pain pill, aspirin, antibiotic capsule, and other medication that is under the
jurisdiction of the FDA, you have certain built in assurances that what you are taking is what is intended and
indicated. There is consistency, uniformity, and quality assurance for the dosage, chemical composition,
bioavailability, and quality of a given medication.
Not so with medical marijuana. The problem with marijuana is that there is absolutely no therapeutic drug on
the market that is administered by smoking. Virtually every medical society and substance abuse group are
against the utilization of smoking marijuana as a means of obtaining a therapeutic benefit because of the lack of
uniformity, consistency, and quality of the dosage obtained. The American Society of Addiction Medicine and
the American Cancer Society are two of the most vocal organizations who are against smoking marijuana as a
medicine. Most addiction medicine researchers still believe marijuana can be a gateway drug, especially for
children under the age of 17. In fact, current research is demonstrating that early frequent use of marijuana by
children under 17 years of age affects development of the endocannabinoid system in children’s brains. That
discussion is given in more detail later in this article.
In the meantime, without strong regulations on where, how, when, and what quality marijuana is produced for
medical and recreational use, the market determines the societal reactions to its presence. In Colorado and
Washington states, there are signs of increased emergency department visits due to marijuana ingestion.
Generally, one bite out of an edible produces enough of a dose of THC to cause a six hour high. Many
emergency visits are by children who see an unwrapped cookie or “gummy bear” and eat it resulting in severe
psycho-active symptoms. The same is true for adults who end up in an emergency room by eating too much
edibles at one time. Recently, a university study in Colorado showed that 20% of emergency room visits after a
motor vehicle collision involved a driver who was impaired by marijuana use. That is an alarming statistic if it
becomes true where ever recreational marijuana is legalized.
However, there are anecdotal reports that marijuana is not as addictive as alcohol and is not as addictive as
opioids, benzodiazepines, or hypnotics. In fact, some data is emerging in Colorado and Washington states that
people who are using marijuana for pain relief or for sleep are showing less use of opioids, sedatives, and sleep
medications. Also, marijuana is not considered a “gateway” drug like it was in the 1960s and 1970s. However, it
is considered by addiction specialists to be a gateway drug if a child under 17 years of age begins regular use
of marijuana. This is because the brains of children are still developing and there is some research that shows
a slowing of brain development in children under 17 years old who regularly smoke or ingest marijuana.
Page 10 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
Interestingly enough, addiction researchers are adamantly against legalization of marijuana either for medical
use or for recreational use due to the paucity of controlled studies on the short and long-term effects of
marijuana use on adults and children.
Another difficult issue that is emerging is the question of medical marijuana, recreational marijuana, and drug
use policies of employers. Logically if employers prohibit employees from showing up to work while drunk on
alcohol, it is not unreasonable to prohibit employees from working while high on marijuana. In fact, many
employers have a “zero tolerance” anti-drug policy for employees, especially employers who have federal
grants, military defense contractors with the federal government, government employers, or teaching
institutions.
So if an employee works for an employer with a zero tolerance drug policy, doesn’t that policy interfere with the
employee’s civil rights concerning his or her activities off the job, especially in states which have legalized
recreational marijuana use? The metabolites of cannabis can last weeks and longer in a hair sample drug test.
These issues will have to be addressed as the liberalization of marijuana use becomes more widespread.
One thing has to be emphasized at this point—marijuana has a variety of effects on each individual. Some
people do not “appear” high at all, while others appear like they are in outer space. The “high” can affect one’s
judgment, reaction times, concentration, and the pace of performing tasks. If pot is strong enough it can
produce psychotic features and hallucinations. There is no uniformity of effect on a given person who is high on
marijuana.
There is growing consensus that a blood level of greater than or equal to 5 nano-grams (ng) per deciliter is the
threshold of impaired driving and impairment of judgment (i.e. a person is “high”). This standard may become
the similar standard that .08 mg alcohol per deciliter of blood determines presumed liability for a DUI conviction.
However, detecting the metabolites of cannabis in the urine is problematic. If a person drinks lots of water
before a drug test for THC or its metabolites, the readings will fall well below the threshold of 5 ng/dl. Besides,
detection of marijuana in the urine can only last for one to five days for occasional users. For people who use
marijuana three to five times a week, urine will test positive for marijuana for up to six weeks. But these tests do
not show that an employee showed up to work while high on marijuana—it is just evidence that the person
ingested it at some time in the recent past.
Can an employer force an employee to have a blood test in a random drug testing program? Probably not since
a blood test is an invasive procedure (with some risk of an infection) while a urine test is totally non-invasive. A
saliva test which is also non-invasive has been developed to determine whether a person has recently used
marijuana.
The problem with marijuana is that the metabolites of THC and other cannabinoids stay in the body for weeks,
mainly stored in the liver and detected by blood testing. So companies with a zero tolerance for drugs will
present a problem for employees who partake use of marijuana while off duty. In many states (at least in
Arizona, California, Colorado, Delaware, Minnesota, Washington, and Oregon), a medical marijuana card is an
affirmative defense for possession of marijuana. The immunity from criminal prosecution does not mean
anything to a zero tolerance employer.
In fact, there is case law that allows an employer to terminate an employee who was under the influence of
medical marijuana while at work, even though some states allow medical and recreational use. It is probable
that a zero tolerance for marijuana in the work place will still hold up, even in California, since employers are
encouraged to promote a drug free work environment for safety, productivity, and customer service
considerations.
Can a claims administrator be legally responsible for paying for medical marijuana for a work related injury? So
far, in California, the answer is “maybe” but in New Mexico, the answer is “yes.” In Vialpando v. Ben’s
Automotive Service [(2014) 331 P.3d 924, cert. denied, 331 P.3d 975], the New Mexico Court of Appeals held
that the New Mexico Compassionate Care Act [N. M. Stat. Ann. §§ 26-2B-1–26-2B-7] includes a product or
service from a supplier that is reasonable and necessary for an injured worker’s treatment. The court held that a
primary treating physician’s recommendation for marijuana use for chronic pain is equivalent to a prescription.
The court rejected the employer’s contention that the employer would violate federal law for paying the costs of
medical marijuana and the court found that reimbursement for medical marijuana is no different than paying
reimbursement for medical supplies or equipment. (Note: It remains to be seen if New Mexico legislation in
Page 11 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
2016 will overturn this decision. See HB 195/SB 245.) Marijuana is a cash business since the banking industry
is federally regulated and money that is deposited from marijuana transactions would violate the banking laws
and could be subject to federal seizure. So a workers’ compensation claims administrator in New Mexico can
only pay the injured worker reimbursement for his or her purchase of medical marijuana at a dispensary.
In California, the Medical Marijuana Act prohibits insurers of any kind to be liable for payment for any medical
marijuana. Health and Safety Code § 11362.785(d) specifically prohibits payments by insurers for medical
marijuana, stating: “Nothing in this article shall require a governmental, private, or any other health insurance
provider or health care service plan to be liable for any claim for reimbursement for the medical use of
marijuana.” It is doubtful, this law will change even if legalization for recreational use passes in 2016. However,
like in New Mexico, claims administrators may be forced to pay the injured worker reimbursement for his or her
purchases of medical marijuana that is reasonably necessary for the cure and relief of the effects of the
industrial injury pursuant to Labor Code § 4600 in connection with a workers’ compensation claim that is
accepted. Case law is developing to determine if a workers’ compensation claims administrator is a
“governmental, private, or any other health insurance provider or health care service plan.” The statutory
provision seems to apply only to general health care plans as opposed to treatment for work related injuries by
a claims administrator, who by definition is not a health insurance provider or health care service plan.
Has the UR/IMR process [Lab. Code §§ 4610, 4610.5] in California ever authorized the use of medical
marijuana as medically necessary? The answer is “yes.” In IMR Case Number CM14-0026456, a utilization
review denial of medical marijuana was overturned by the Independent Medical Reviewer. This case involved a
43-year-old male who developed traumatic and anoxic [loss of oxygenation] brain injuries from an electrocution
injury on September 15, 2001. He has significant white matter changes on MRI scanning in addition to frontal
lobe dysfunction on EEG studies. He has been diagnosed with hypoxic encephalopathy, subcortical dementia
and frontal lobe dysfunction. He is reported to express anxiety, irritability, disorientation, frequent headaches
and orthopedic back pain, and knee problems. He has been treated with extensive outpatient and inpatient
interventions. His medications include Prozac, Gabapentin (Neurontin), Fioricet, and Viagra. His headaches
and irritability are not well controlled.
The question presented was whether marijuana use for aggression and anxiety is medically necessary and
appropriate. The Utilization Review physician found that medical marijuana was not appropriate since based on
the MTUS (Medical Treatment Utilization Schedule) Chronic Pain Guidelines, Cannabinoids, there is not
enough evidence to justify the use of marijuana for chronic pain and marijuana is a Schedule 1 controlled
substance under Federal law. The IMR physician overturned the denial citing Non-MTUS Other Medical
Treatment Guideline or Medical Evidence: “Effect of Marijuana Use On Outcomes In Traumatic Brain Injury”
Nguyen et al. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25264643] also citing “The Endocannabinoid System: A
Key
Modulator
of
Emotion
and
Cognition”
Patrixia
Camolongo,
[http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3490098].”
The IMR reviewer then stated:
MTUS and ODG Guidelines do not address the issue of cannabis use for emotional effects of anoxic
and/or traumatic brain injury. This is not being requested in the context of chronic pain. There is good
evidence that Cannabinoids are neuroprotective from injury and there is established evidence that
cannabis can impact anxiety/anger disorders with improvement or worsening depending on the individual.
Given the nature of the medical diagnosis there are no quality evidence based studies. However, under
these unique circumstances a trial of marijuana is medically reasonable as its known mechanism of action
may be beneficial in this setting. If it is not clearly beneficial, long term approval should be re-reviewed.
In this case, the Applicant has to purchase his medical marijuana directly from a licensed dispensary and then
seek reimbursement from the workers’ compensation claims administrator. This IMR is the first known medical
necessity decision that authorizes the use of medical marijuana as reasonable and necessary treatment. Notice
that the IMR reviewer specifically stated in his or her decision that marijuana use in this case is for modulation
of emotions from brain damage and is not being prescribed for chronic pain. It remains to be seen in other
cases whether medical marijuana can be justified in a work injury for treatment of chronic pain by utilization and
IMR reviews.
Page 12 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
Other than five thousand years of anecdotal evidence, what legitimate medical research exists to date on the
medical benefits, if any, of marijuana? As stated earlier in this article, no large scale randomized, placebo
controlled trials (RCT) involving human participants have been conducted due to fear of losing federal grant
money. Some small studies show promising results for use of marijuana for chronic pain but the results are
conflicting. Some emerging studies, also with too small number of participants, showed a synergistic effect
when using marijuana with an opioid which lowered opioid use and abuse. These studies show fewer side
effects from marijuana use than from opioid use. Formal research needs to be conducted to see if marijuana
can be an effective treatment for substance use disorders. After all, no one has ever died from an overdose of
marijuana while over 28,000 people have died from opioid overdoses in the last year in the United States.
There is some evidence that marijuana can be effective for some patients who have neuropathic pain (such as
in causalgia, cauda equine syndrome) and some indication of effectiveness for patients, including children, who
have severe spasticity (from Multiple Sclerosis, paralysis, epilepsy, or stroke). Also, there is some empirical
evidence that marijuana causes appetite improvement for patients on chemotherapy from cancer treatment and
patients who have weight loss due to active AIDS.
The effectiveness of cannabinoids including Delta-9 THC on patients with seizure disorders are mostly
anecdotal and a survey of studies demonstrate a need for double blind, placebo controlled random clinical trials
to determine whether psychoactive or non-psychoactive marijuana provides effective treatment. A review of
existing studies in the United States and abroad shows how inconclusive the medical evidence is on whether or
not marijuana can be effective in the treatment of certain seizure disorders [see Friedman and Devinsky,
Cannabinoids In the Treatment Of Epilepsy, New England Journal of Medicine, September 10, 2015, 373, 11,
1048–1058]. In this article, the authors point out that 30% of patients who have a seizure disorder do not
respond to anti-seizure medications that are on the market. In addition, they indicate that there is evidence that
marijuana has been used to treat seizures since 1800 B.C.E. in Sumeria.
The authors’ review of existing studies show so far that use of marijuana for certain seizure disorders are
promising but the medical evidence is too weak. The neurologist-authors express their concern about the
effects of marijuana on the human brain at page 1051:
Much of the available data regarding the safety and side-effect profile of cannabinoids, especially with
long-term use, come from studies examining the effects of recreational use [citing Solowij, Adverse Effects
of Cannabis, Lancet 1998; 352: 1611–6; Volkow, et al. Adverse Health Effects of Marijuana, NEJM 2014;
370: 2219–27]. The short-term side effects of cannabis use may include impairment of memory, judgment,
and motor performance. High levels of Delta 9 THC are associated with psychosis and an increased risk of
motor vehicle accidents. With long-term use there is a risk of addiction, which occurs in 9% of long term
users. Other effects of long term use include cognitive impairment, decreased motivation, and an increased
risk of psychotic disorders.
The authors go on to warn on page 1052 that there is emerging evidence that cannabinoids affect the
endocannabinoid system development in childhood and adolescents and early exposure to Delta 9 THC may
lead to cognitive and behavioral changes. Brain imaging studies are showing that there are “altered structure
and function in long term adult users, including impaired connectivity of the prefrontal cortices and precuneus
and decreased volume in the hippocampi and amygdalae; long terms use of cannabis in childhood may be
associated with lower than expected IQ scores but socioeconomic status may be a confounding factor.”
In the Journal of the American Medical Association, June 23, 2015 edition there is an article entitled,
“Cannabinoids For Medical Use, A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” by Whiting et al. 313(24) 2456–
2473 which summarizes the existing medical research on medical marijuana. The authors evaluated 79 trials
with 6,462 human participants where only four of the studies had a low bias. A “bias” means that the quality of
the study results are compromised due to having too small sample size, the selection of study participants had
a selection criteria that affected the neutrality of the study, there are incomplete outcome measures, or the
study design itself skewed the results. The authors point out that only four of the clinical studies had a strong
design that was double blind, placebo controlled, and randomized with four to six arms. However, most of the
studies did have a control group who were given a placebo.
The studies were mostly conducted outside the United States with some that were conducted here. The studies
involved derivatives of cannabinoids including Ajulemic acid (approved by FDA on 2/10/15 in the United States
Page 13 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
as non-psychoactive synthetic cannabinoid oral capsule for treatment of inflammation of scleroderma),
Dronabinol (synthetic THC for treatment of anorexia from AIDS, cancer weight loss), Levonantradal (not in use,
synthetic version of Dronabinol), Nabilone (synthetic THC for chemotherapy induced nausea approved by FDA
in 1985), Nabiximols (combination of THC and cannabidiol not approved in US but used in Europe for spasticity
from multiple sclerosis), ECP002A (98% pure THC, not used in US oral tablet for spasticity), Cannabis (THC
smoked three cigarettes a day with potency 2.5% to 9.4% active, or oral capsule, or vaporized form, pain,
Tourettes syndrome).
The studies were ranked based on strength of evidence that is used in the research community and in
evidence-based medicine. So a high quality study has a large sample size, placebo controlled double blind four
arm random clinical trial with minimal or no bias, and replicated in the scientific community with a peer reviewed
publication. A very low quality study means the results are promising but you cannot put any weight on the
results to apply to the general population.
The results of the authors’ review of the existing marijuana studies show that there is moderate quality evidence
to support the use of cannabinoids for the treatment of chronic cancer or neuropathic pain or spasticity [multiple
sclerosis patients or paraplegics for example]; low quality evidence that suggested that cannabinoids were
associated with improvements in nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy, weight gain for AIDS infection,
sleep disorders, and Tourette syndrome. There is insufficient evidence of improvement in symptoms of
depression with marijuana use. In addition the studies indicated that use of cannabinoids resulted in an
increased risk of short term adverse effects including dizziness, dry mouth, nausea, fatigue, somnolence,
euphoria, vomiting, disorientation, drowsiness, confusion, loss of balance, and hallucination.
Most of the studies reviewed by the authors did not involve the study participants smoking marijuana—most of
the studies involved the participants being given oral capsules of Delta 9 THC or Nabiximols, or a placebo
equivalent. The chronic pain patients were either cancer patients or had documented neuropathic pain and the
marijuana seemed to improve pain scales by 30% compared to placebo groups. The authors caution that any
positive result must be weighed by the fact that none of the studies were pristine. For example, there is no way
to tell what component in the marijuana, if any, was effective in reducing pain by 30% or in reducing spasticity
for multiple sclerosis or paraplegic patients.
If you read this JAMA article, you come away from it concluding that better quality research on the effects of
marijuana on chronic pain, spasticity, depression, multiple sclerosis, anxiety, nausea/vomiting, sleep disorders,
epilepsy, depression, Tourette’s syndrome, and Glaucoma are needed. Most of the studies reviewed in the
JAMA article were performed in England and Canada.
There is quite a bit of anecdotal evidence that regular use of marijuana helps reduce muscle spasms, reduces
pain levels, increases appetite, reduces anxiety, reduces the frequency and severity of seizures, and assists in
getting and staying asleep. These anecdotal beliefs need to be formally studied especially if recreational
marijuana use is legalized.
As medical marijuana transforms itself from vague “medical use” to recreational use by legislation in many
states, including California, we will hopefully see science catch up with anecdotes. First and foremost,
Congress needs to pass legislation that redefines marijuana and Delta 9 THC as a Schedule II controlled
substance. As of the date of publication of this article in 2016, US Senate Bill 683 the CARERS Act
(Compassionate Access, Research Expansion, and Respect States Act of 2015) is pending in Congress to
declare marijuana a Schedule II controlled substance, fund research, and to modify federal banking laws. This
transformation will allow federal funding by the NIH, NIDA, and the CDC to study marijuana and its compounds
to see what real medical benefits or risks are involved. This will result in the quality control for dosing and type
of marijuana that the public may purchase for effective medical use, if any exist.
In the meantime it looks like even California is moving towards allowing medical marijuana to be authorized for
treatment of work related traumatic brain injuries in order to reduce anxiety and modulate emotional effects of
documented brain damage. It is a matter of time that medical marijuana may be the least of all evils for
treatment of chronic pain, compared to the severe potential consequences of long term use of opioids including
dependency, addiction, and overdose. Before any of this happens, better controlled research needs to be
conducted where the compounds of cannabis can be isolated and tested to see what components of marijuana
actually has health benefits. In technical terms, we do not know what the pharmacodynamics is for the
Page 14 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
psychoactive and non-psychoactive cannabinoids in marijuana. We don’t know to what extent marijuana can
serve as a medicine and how specific dosages and types of marijuana can be processed with uniform
consistency, potency, safety, and efficacy.
We cannot ignore the fact that marijuana use is creeping into the workers’ compensation arena and we need to
discover its role, whether prescribed or not, and how marijuana use affects injured workers who are also taking
prescribed opioids, benzodiazepines, muscle relaxants, and hypnotics. We do not know the synergistic affect
marijuana may have on injured workers who are taking narcotic pain medications, anti-anxiety medications, and
or sleeping medications. Conversely, perhaps injured workers would improve functioning, experience pain
relief, and become less dependent on prescribed potentially addictive medications such as these in favor of a
few joints per day instead, with only a 9% risk of addiction to marijuana.
Something to think about while you don’t bogart that joint, my friend, and pass it over to me; roll another one,
just like the other one … [Fraternity of Man, Country Joe and the Fish; Easy Rider, 1969].
[4] Apportionment Post-2018: The Rice, Hikida, Lindh, and Other Cases
[a] Rice
Two important California District Court of Appeal (DCA) cases emerged in 2017 that impacts our law
practices and should be considered a part of the analysis of apportionment along with the standard bearers,
Marlene Escobedo v. Marshalls [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc decision)], E.L.
Yeager Construction v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Gatten) [(2006) 145 Cal. App. 4th 922, 71 Cal. Comp.
Cases 1687], and Benson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2009) 170 Cal. App. 4th 1535, 74 Cal. Comp.
Cases 113]. In City of Jackson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Rice) [(2017) 11 Cal. App. 5th 109, 82 Cal.
Comp. Cases 437], the court determined that heredity and genetic factors can be considered in the analysis
of apportionment, while in Hikida v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2017) 12 Cal. App. 5th 1249, 82 Cal.
Comp. Cases 679], the court determined that medical treatment can be an un-apportioned cause of
permanent disability despite the existence of more than one underlying industrial injury to the same part of
body.
In the Rice case, Officer Rice was a 29-year-old police officer who claimed cumulative trauma to his
cervical spine as a result of his police work. He became a reserve police officer in 2004, became full time in
2005, and filed a cumulative trauma orthopedic claim in 2009—after only a 5-year career as a police officer.
Diagnostic imaging studies, including x-rays and MRI scans, showed what in medical circles is referred to
as “early onset spinal disease”, including spondylosis (arthritic vertebral bodies, bony structures of the
spine, and degenerative disc disease), which are findings that are unusual for a person who is younger
than 40 years of age. Officer Rice’s father also had a history of lumbar spinal disease, but he was not a
police officer. In fact, Officer Rice’s father had an arduous job for 30 years and it is difficult to see how a
long history of heavy work, coupled with degenerative disc disease in the lumbar spine, sets up any kind of
genetic predisposition for his son to develop early onset cervical spinal disease.
Nevertheless, in her MMI report and under the discussion of apportionment, the QME in the case opined
that 17% of Officer Rice’s cervical spine impairment was due to his police work with the remainder of his
disability due to non-industrial factors, including the specific finding that 49% was due to hereditary and
genetic factors. The workers’ compensation judge in part accepted the medical opinion on apportionment,
contending that the apportionment was not to impermissible immutable factors, that the physician’s
conclusions had not confused causation of injury with causation of disability, and that the physician’s
conclusions constituted substantial medical evidence.
The WCAB panel reversed the judge’s decision awarding the Applicant an un-apportioned award. The
Defendant City filed a Petition for Writ at the DCA which was granted. The DCA held that apportionment of
disability can include consideration of hereditary and genetic factors, much the same way that a pre-
existing non-industrial pathology can be considered, which was part of the hallmark of Labor Code §§ 4663
and 4664 in SB 899 and discussed in the Escobedo case. The DCA cited post-SB 899 case law that
allowed either directly or indirectly apportionment based on heredity or genetics but phrased informally as a
“family history” [see, e.g., Kos v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2008) 73 Cal. Comp. Cases 529 (writ
Page 15 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
denied) (an MRI scan six weeks after a specific injury showed severe degenerative disc disease which the
doctor found permanent disability was 90% due to non-industrial factors including a pre-existing genetic
pre-disposition); Acme Steel v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Borman) (2013) 218 Cal. App. 4th 1137, 78
Cal. Comp. Cases 751 (40% apportionment for hearing loss is from a pre-existing pathology of cochlear
degeneration)].
In her QME reporting, the QME in Rice stated that medical literature supports the finding that degenerative
disc disease in adults may be explained “up to 75% by genes alone.” The court latched on to this statement
and indicated that “Every case of degenerative disc disease in adults is caused in part by genetics or
heredity, and the other part by other factors.” The court stated that it was unnecessary for the QME to
determine Officer Rice’s actual family history of degenerative disc disease because the QME’s research
indicated that heredity or genetics is a major factor in all cases of degenerative disc disease. The court
concluded that the QME’s reporting constituted substantial medical evidence based on a correct medical
history, diagnostic studies (x-rays, MRI scans), objective symptoms of a cervical radiculopathy, and medical
studies that showed degenerative disc disease is in large part hereditary.
In Rice and in the cases cited by the Court in Rice, the emphasis is apportionment to the pathology and not
to the cause of the pathology, which is a hallmark of the WCAB en banc decision in Escobedo. The WCAB
since 2005 has given us the laundry list for apportionment of permanent disability: based on the natural
progression of a non-industrial condition or disease, a pre-existing disability, or a post-injury disabling event
or condition, or pathology, asymptomatic prior conditions, and retroactive prophylactic work restrictions.
In the context of genetics and heredity, certainly the pathology of degenerative disc disease (or arthritic
knees in Escobedo) can cause additional permanent disability when coupled with an industrial specific or
cumulative trauma work injury. But there is another side to this equation that was not discussed by the court
in Rice.
The QME in Rice clearly cherry-picked the medical literature in her quest to justify her conclusion that the
young officer’s degenerative disc disease was genetically caused. There is just as much medical research
and literature that supports the conclusion that degenerative disc disease is not disabling in a large portion
of the population and is not a good predictor of who becomes disabled because of it and when that
pathology becomes disabling, if at all, for any given person. In fact, there is significant medical research
that shows a large population of people who have severe degenerative spinal disease at autopsy
(degenerative disc disease, spondylosis, spondylolisthesis, etc.) who had no symptoms and no history of
medical treatment even though access to lifetime orthopedic medical treatment was available.
An objective analysis of the role of early onset spinal disease in a 29-year-old police officer is problematic
to begin with. With the probability of no symptoms for a lifetime to a need for spinal surgery at age 30 (in
Officer Rice’s case), there is no hard and fast rule on how to apportion to the underlying pathology. The
point is that it does not matter what caused Officer Rice’s early onset spinal disease—whether hereditary or
not. The fact is that he had severely degenerated discs and the WCAB Escobedo decision allows for
apportionment to that process since it became symptomatic and disabling. The QME in Rice could have
avoided the whole genetics analysis by simply apportioning to the underlying degenerative disc disease in a
very young individual, which in the population is very unusual and rare.
The remaining discussion in this section is based on the medical issues raised in the Rice case and to what
extent can heredity or genetics play a role in an analysis of apportionment. What is missing in the Rice
decision is the development of the record prior to trial of the case in discussing the issue of heredity and
genetics with the physician. The discussion here is relevant for counsel to consider when deposing a doctor
or when preparing advocacy letters to one.
How strong is the evidence that in Rice the Applicant’s permanent impairment was caused 49% by
hereditary and genetic factors? Was the QME correct? How persuasive are the authorities cited by the
physician in her report that there are genetic factors that cause early onset spinal disease? The first
premise is that workers’ compensation attorneys are not experts in genetics or in heredity. Nor are
orthopedic QMEs and AMEs. The study of genetics and the disease process from genetically linked factors
is a new science, and there is very little scientific evidence to support Dr. Blair’s conclusions.
Page 16 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
From a purely evidentiary standpoint, Dr. Blair’s 49% apportionment to Officer Rice’s heredity based solely
on the fact that his father had cervical spinal disease is based on surmise, speculation and guess. We do
not know why Officer Rice’s father had cervical spinal disease and we do not know when the father’s
condition began to cause symptoms. In fact, from the case, we do not even know if Officer Rice’s father
also had early onset spinal disease. We do not know his father’s work and outside work activities that could
have caused his spinal disease. These factual issues are completely separate from the discussion about
genetics and heredity that should have been developed in the record prior to trial.
Even the AMA Guides addresses the epidemiology of spinal disorders on age 383–384, where the authors
of the Guides state:
The DRE method recommends that physicians document physiologic and structural impairments
relating to injuries or diseases other than common developmental findings, such as (1) spondylolysis,
found normally in 7% of adults; (2) spondylolisthesis, found in 3% of adults; (3) herniated disc without
radiculopathy, found in approximately 30% of individuals by age 40 years; and (4) aging changes,
present in 40% of adults after age 35 and in almost all individuals after age 50. As previously noted,
the presence of these abnormalities on imaging studies does not necessarily mean the individual has
an impairment due to an injury.
In cases where the abnormalities discussed above are present on imaging studies and are known or
assumed to have pre-existed an injury being rated, physicians should acknowledge these antecedent
conditions. If requested, physicians may need to assess whether the condition was previously
symptomatic and whether any aggravation occurred as a result of the injury. Physicians should be
aware of the statutory definition in the involved jurisdiction pertaining to aggravation to ensure their use
of the term is consistent with their state’s legal interpretation.
Remember, the AMA Guides do not contemplate the fact that 9 states, including California, recognizes the
existence of “cumulative trauma” injuries. Reading this section of the Guides in the context of the Rice case
makes sense from an apportionment standpoint. The implication here is that the pathology of Officer Rice’s
cervical degenerative disc disease at a young age is an outlier case, where certainly the development of
the pathology is occurring concurrently, in part, with the industrially related injurious exposure for five years
as a police officer. This author believes that Dr. Blair’s apportioning to the underlying early onset spinal
disease process was justified, but without any need to discuss genetics or heredity. It is all about the
evolution of the pathology on a parallel path with injurious exposure that caused the need for cervical spinal
surgery and resulting impairment at such a young age without an acute injury that precipitated it.
When genetics or heredity is discussed, counsel must start with the well accepted scientific fact that very
few human illnesses have been identified as having a genetic base. Female breast cancers involving the
BRCA I and BRCA II genetic link is one of the clearly identified genetically linked disease process. Even
though diabetes can run in families, no actual genetic link has been identified within the genomes of
families who tend to develop diabetes. The same applies to heart disease. Why not?
There is an excellent article in the Journal of the American Medical Association called “Finding the Rare
Pathogenic Variants In A Human Genome” [JAMA, 2013, 317(18): 1904–1905] that describes in detail how
few medical conditions can be linked to specific genetic characteristics. The human genome consists of
three billion nucleotide pairs. There are 3 million known variants where the pairing of nucleotides are
incorrect (called a single nucleotide polymorphism, also known as a “mutation”). There are 100,000 known
variants within genes with about 25,000 in and immediately near exons (where genetic coding occurs).
There are between 1000–5000 variants in exons of genes known to be associated with disease. The
bottom line is that 99% of all genetic mutations are likely benign variants and are not associated with any
disease process. Only 1% of variants are of unknown significance and less than 1% of genetic variances
are pathogenic or likely pathogenic.
Whenever physicians talk about “family history,” “heredity,” or “genetic factors,” they are referring to risk
factors and not necessarily direct causation of a medical condition. In fact, environmental factors
sometimes play a greater role in causing a disease process to develop than a person’s given genetic make-
up. This is where the grand debate about genetic factors and apportionment occurs. The Rice case does
not help us with this debate because the medical evidence was very weak. The QME in Rice simply took a
Page 17 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
risk factor and apportioned 49% of the Applicant’s cervical spine impairment to it and apportioned 17% to
work activities as a police officer. But the physician failed to state how and why the risk factor existed in the
first place and how and why it became causative of permanent impairment. This analysis is required under
the Escobedo and Gatten cases.
When counsel has received a report from an evaluating or treating physician who opines that a certain
percentage of an Applicant’s impairment or permanent disability is caused by heredity or genetics, a
deposition of the doctor is appropriate. From a defense perspective, counsel would want to establish
exactly how and why genetic or hereditary factors are causing permanent disability in a given case. How
does the physician know that in this particular case, apportionment to genetics is within reasonable medical
probability? What literature is the physician relying on to come to his or her conclusions. What factual basis
is there? How can the doctor identify genetics as a risk factor and how does the risk factor become
causative in this case? It boils down to a question of medical honesty and not creative writing by a
physician. Also, what medical literature is the physician cherry-picking or has the physician discussed
opposing medical research?
Can an employer or its claims administrator compel genetic testing of an injured employee? Does the Rice
case open discovery rights for an employer or its claims administrator? Remember, genetic testing under
GINA is prohibited in order to avoid discrimination in housing, employment, and insurability. See Ch. 4,
§ 4.07 of this guidebook for a discussion about the federal Genetics Information Non-Disclosure Act.
How is a physician deposed if he or she has concluded that part of an Applicant’s permanent disability or
impairment is due to heredity or genetic factors? A recent example is appropriate here. There is a recent
case this author handled involving a police officer who developed hyperhidrosis of his hands whenever he
got involved in a very stressful situation at work, including pulling his firearm, handcuffing an arrestee, or
engaging in a fight with a suspect. Hyperhidrosis is excessive sweating and in this case, it occurred only to
the officer’s hands in severely stressful conditions. It never occurred off work and the symptoms began
about five years into the officer’s career. While the officer was not represented by legal counsel, he was
examined by a QME in dermatology.
The QME dermatologist opined that the officer’s hyperhidrosis was partially work related because the
symptoms only occurred while the officer was at work and during stressful work conditions. He also opined
that 90% of the permanent impairment (Class 1, Table 8-2) of 2% WPI was due to “non-industrial hereditary
and genetic factors” and 10% was due to work activities. Needless to say, the panel QME’s deposition was
taken. The following questions were asked of the doctor with a summary of his answers:
• “How many hyperhidrosis cases have you treated in your career?” (Answer: hundreds).
• “Is this your first hyperhidrosis case you have evaluated as a QME or AME?” (Answer: yes)
• After quoting the exact criteria of a Class 2 Table 8-2, the QME agreed that the Applicant met that
criteria which is actually between 10%–24% WPI and not a Class 1 2% WPI as he opined in his
report. He testified he would have to re-examine the Applicant to get an accurate WPI rating.
• In his report, the QME stated there is no family history of hyperhidrosis and at his deposition, he was
asked, “How can you apportion to genetics when the Officer has no family history of
hyperhidrosis?” The QME testified that he would have to ask the Applicant again about his family
history when he re-examines him and that this condition probably is genetically based, because “it
runs in families.”
• Then the QME was asked: “Can you identify the single nucleotide polymorphisms of the alleles that
caused his genetically based hyperhidrosis?” The QME testified he is not a geneticist and does not
know whether there are alleles that have mutations in this patient or whether genetic mutations
have even been identified for hyperhidrosis. He was correct, at least in his answers here.
• “So, Doctor, if you cannot even tell us whether there are identifiable mutations in someone’s genes
that cause hyperhidrosis, how can you tell us with reasonable medical probability that in this
Officer’s case that his hyperhidrosis is 90% due to genetic factors?” The doctor testified that he
Page 18 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
thinks this condition runs in families and the Applicant probably has had the condition but never
realized it.
• “Aren’t you speculating if you don’t know what the actual genetic link is, that there probably is none
known yet, and this patient does not have a family history of the disorder?” Despite this discussion
the QME stuck by his conclusions in his report, and an astute defense attorney knew that his
conclusions could not be relied upon by a judge.
In short, counsel should always ask a physician who apportions to “family history,” “heredity”, or “genetic
factors,” if he or she can cite the specific genetic mutations that have been identified that places a person at
risk of developing a specific disease. Remember, from the discussion above, a genetic pre-disposition
means that specific genes are turned on that should be off, or turned off that should be on, or identifiable
mutations exist that places the person at risk of developing a specific disease process.
[b] Hikida
In the Hikida case, the Applicant sustained cumulative traumatic injuries to her hands and wrists and other
parts of body. When her wrist was operated on for a carpal tunnel release, she developed a severe case of
complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). The AME evaluating physician opined that the Applicant was
100% permanently and totally disabled but 10% of her disability was due to non-industrial factors that
contributed to her carpal tunnel syndrome. The AME also opined that her permanent total disability was
entirely due to the effects of the CRPS that she developed as a result of the failed wrist surgery.
After a somewhat torturous journey to the WCAB, back to the trial level, back up to the WCAB, and then to
the Court of Appeal, the published DCA decision was issued.
We have seen many cases where there are multiple injuries to the same part of body where eventually the
Applicant has surgery to that body part and a poor result from surgery occurs. We have all seen our share
of chronic pain syndrome cases that arise out of a failed lumbar spinal surgery. The Hikida case has to be
understood in context. Her original injuries were to her upper extremities. The surgical procedure resulted in
the CRPS.
As discussed in detail in this guidebook at Ch. 4, § 4.16, CRPS is a central nervous system disorder and is
no longer an upper or lower extremity condition even though the original injuries were to the upper
extremities in this case. The DCA’s analysis is spot on from a medical standpoint since the Applicant’s
disability is caused by the CRPS and not by the underlying median nerve injuries to her wrists. Once she
developed the CRPS from the carpal tunnel surgery, her disability was no longer stemming from an upper
extremity disorder—she has a completely different body system, i.e., the central nervous system, that is
directly causing her permanent total disability.
The Court of Appeal defined the issue in this case as to whether an employer is responsible for both the
medical treatment and disability arising directly from unsuccessful medical intervention, without
apportionment. In these cases, the key element is that the resulting permanent disability has to arise
directly from the unsuccessful medical treatment. The court’s conclusion is an extension of the well-
established law that since an employer is liable for medical treatment to cure and relieve the effects of an
industrial injury, an employer is also liable for the foreseeable consequences of such medical treatment,
without apportionment. Here, the Applicant’s permanent total disability was caused by the CRPS which was
a compensable consequence of the carpal tunnel surgery.
From a defense perspective, it can be said that the DCA decision is limited to cases in which a new
diagnosis occurs after unsuccessful treatment for an underlying injury. For this reason, it remains to be
seen whether there will be wide application of Hikida in future cases. Also, the Court in Hikida did not
address a different but recurring problem in cases where there is more than one injury to the same part of
body resulting in surgery that causes significant impairment and disability that arises from the unsuccessful
surgery. Does the court’s decision in Hikida override the mandate to determine apportionment of permanent
disability “for each injury” in accordance with Benson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2009) 170 Cal. App.
4th 1535, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113]?
Page 19 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
[c] Apportionment Under the AMA Guides
[i] Generally
This subject has been and will continue to be a highly litigated and controversial issue, even in AMA
Guides cases. The AMA Guides in fact make our cases ripe for litigation and controversy on the issue
of apportionment. Apportionment in the Guides looks somewhat like Labor Code § 4663 [see AMA
Guides, Chapter 1, pages 11–12]. However, it appears that the authors of AMA Guides Chapter 1
confuse causation of an injury with causation of an impairment. California law requires that we
distinguish between causation of an injury [see Reyes v. Hart Plastering (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases
223 (Appeals Board significant panel decision)], and causation of permanent disability at the time the
applicant is permanent and stationary or has reached maximum medical improvement [see Escobedo
v. Marshalls (2005) 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc); E.L. Yeager Construction v.
WCAB (Gatten) (2007) 145 Cal. App. 4th 922, 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1687].
The important point here is that even the authors of the AMA Guides mandate the individualization of
each person’s impairment rating. Labor Code § 4660 mandates that the state utilize a uniform,
objective, and consistent method of rating industrial injuries. What is clear from reading AMA Guides
Chapters 1 and 2 is that the only thing that is “uniform, objective and consistent” as mandated by the
Labor Code is the actual use of the AMA Guides. But once you open the Guides and use its pages in a
given case for a given applicant, any uniformity, objectivity or consistency is discarded in favor of both
individualizing a person’s impairment rating based in part on the effects of the impairment on that
person’s ADLs and individualizing apportionment of impairments to “other factors” if appropriate.
The hallmark case on apportionment that was issued by the WCAB in its en banc decision in 2005
remains the gold standard for all physicians to follow when determining the nature, and extent, if any, of
apportionment of disability. The WCAB provided guidelines for the entire workers’ compensation
community in Escobedo v. Marshalls [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc)]. The
WCAB stated four guidelines for physicians to follow based on the mandate of Labor Code § 4663:
Based on our review of the relevant statutory and case law, we hold that:
1) Section 4663(a)’s statement that the apportionment of permanent disability shall be based on
“causation” refers to the causation of the permanent disability, not causation of the injury, and
the analysis of the causal factors of permanent disability for purposes of apportionment may be
different from the analysis of the causal factors of the injury itself.
2) Section 4663(c) not only prescribes what determinations a reporting physician must make with
respect to apportionment, it also prescribes what standards the WCAB must use in deciding
apportionment; that is, both a reporting physician and the WCAB must make determinations of
what percentage of the permanent disability was directly caused by the industrial injury and
what percentage was caused by other factors.
3) Under section 4663, the applicant has the burden of establishing the percentage of permanent
disability directly caused by the industrial injury, and the defendant has the burden of
establishing the percentage of disability caused by other factors.
4) Apportionment of permanent disability caused by “other factors both before and subsequent to
the industrial injury, including prior industrial injuries,” may include not only disability that could
have been apportioned prior to SB 899, but it also may include disability that formerly could not
have been apportioned (e.g., pathology, asymptomatic prior conditions, and retroactive
prophylactic work preclusions), provided there is substantial medical evidence establishing that
these other factors have caused permanent disability.
5) Even where a medical report “addresses” the issue of causation of the permanent disability and
makes an “apportionment determination” by finding the approximate relative percentages of
industrial and non-industrial causation under section 4663(a), the report may not be relied
upon unless it also constitutes substantial evidence.
Page 20 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
These guidelines have endured, with very few published Supreme Court, Court of Appeal, and WCAB
en banc decisions since then on the issue of apportionment.
In order to understand the WCAB’s guidelines in Escobedo, an understanding of the facts in that case
is appropriate. Ms. Escobedo was a retail clerk at Marshalls and she fell down a short stairway and
landed on her left knee. She injured the right knee as a result of compensating for her injured left knee,
and the employer accepted liability for both knees. Diagnostic studies conducted soon after the injury
revealed that the Applicant had significant osteoarthritis of both knees, which could not have been
caused by the fall at work. One physician concluded that the Applicant had permanent impairment to
both knees with no apportionment to other factors under Labor Code § 4663 because she had no
symptoms, pain, or restrictions of activities before the fall at work.
Dr. Ovadia opined in contrast that because the Applicant had significant pathology to her knees that
pre-existed her acute injury that 50% of her permanent disability was due to the non-industrial
osteoarthritis and 50% was due to her industrial injuries and the consequences thereof. The trial judge
awarded permanent disability benefits with no apportionment based on the reasoning that the Applicant
had no evidence of disability prior to the industrial injury, no knee symptoms, and no medical treatment
to her knees before the injury.
The WCAB reversed the trial judge and awarded benefits based on Dr. Ovadia’s conclusion that 50%
of Applicant’s permanent disability was due to industrial causation and 50% was due to her pre-existing
non-industrial but asymptomatic osteoarthritis. The WCAB emphasized that the analysis of causation of
an industrial injury is a separate and distinct analysis from a determination of the causation of
permanent disability and that both may not be the same.
It is also important for counsel to remember that the WCAB decision in Escobedo mandates that the
applicant has the burden of proving what percentage of permanent disability is due to industrial injuries
and the employer then has the burden of proving what percentage of disability is caused by other
factors such as non-industrial factors, such as pathology, asymptomatic prior conditions, retroactive
prophylactic work preclusions, or subsequent injuries. The WCAB also described the duty of a trial
judge and the WCAB itself if more than one reporting physician has conflicting conclusions on
apportionment of permanent disability:
If the reporting physicians disagree regarding the overall level of permanent disability and/or
regarding the approximate percentages of industrially and non-industrially caused permanent
disability, or if a party disagrees with the opinion of a reporting physician, then the WCJ (or the
Appeals Board) must weigh the evidence appropriately and determine these issues based on the
most persuasive substantial medical evidence.
The WCAB also reiterated long-standing case law on what constitutes substantial medical evidence
and the requirement that physicians state that their conclusions are based on reasonable medical
probability:
In this regard, it has been long established that, in order to constitute substantial evidence, a
medical opinion must be predicated on reasonable medical probability. (McAllister v. Workmen’s
Comp. Appeals Bd. (1968) 69 Cal.2d 408, 413, 416-417, 419 [71 Cal. Rptr. 697, 33 Cal. Comp.
Cases 660, 445 P.2d 313]; Travelers Ins. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Odello) (1949) 33 Cal.2d
685, 687-688 [203 P.2d 747] [14 Cal .Comp. Cases 54]; Rosas v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1692, 1700-1702, 1705 [20 Cal. Rptr. 2d 778] [58 Cal. Comp. Cases 313].)
Also, a medical opinion is not substantial evidence if it is based on facts no longer germane, on
inadequate medical histories or examinations, on incorrect legal theories, or on surmise,
speculation, conjecture, or guess. (Hegglin v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd. (1971) 4 Cal.3d 162,
169 [93 Cal. Rptr. 15, 36 Cal. Comp. Cases 93, 480 P.2d 967]; Place v. Workmen’s Comp.
Appeals Bd. (1970) 3 Cal.3d 372, 378-379 [90 Cal. Rptr. 424, 35 Cal. Comp. Cases 525, 475 P.2d
656]; Zemke v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd., supra, 68 Cal.2d at p. 798.) Further, a medical
report is not substantial evidence unless it sets forth the reasoning behind the physician’s opinion,
not merely his or her conclusions. (Granado v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1970) 69 Cal.2d 399,
407 [71 Cal. Rptr. 678, 445 P.2d 294] (a mere legal conclusion does not furnish a basis for a
Page 21 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
finding); Zemke v. Workmen’s Comp. Appeals Bd., supra, 68 Cal.2d at pp. 799, 800-801 (an
opinion that fails to disclose its underlying basis and gives a bare legal conclusion does not
constitute substantial evidence); see also People v. Bassett (1968) 69 Cal.2d 122, 141, 144 [70
Cal. Rptr. 193, 443 P.2d 777] (the chief value of an expert’s testimony rests upon the material from
which his or her opinion is fashioned and the reasoning by which he or she progresses from the
material to the conclusion, and it does not lie in the mere expression of the conclusion; thus, the
opinion of an expert is no better than the reasons upon which it is based).)
Thus, to be substantial evidence on the issue of the approximate percentages of permanent
disability due to the direct results of the injury and the approximate percentage of permanent
disability due to other factors, a medical opinion must be framed in terms of reasonable medical
probability, it must not be speculative, it must be based on pertinent facts and on an adequate
examination and history, and it must set forth reasoning in support of its conclusions.”
The WCAB provides the workers’ compensation community with guidance on what legally is expected
from physicians in their determination about whether apportionment of permanent disability exists and
how and why the physicians come to their conclusions. What is interesting about the guidance is that
they use a back condition as an example rather than the degenerative joint disease for knees that Ms.
Escobedo had at the time of her fall at Marshalls:
For example, if a physician opines that approximately 50% of an employee’s back disability is
directly caused by the industrial injury, the physician must explain how and why the disability is
causally related to the industrial injury (e.g., the industrial injury resulted in surgery which caused
vulnerability that necessitates certain restrictions) and how and why the injury is responsible for
approximately 50% of the disability. And, if a physician opines that 50% of an employee’s back
disability is caused by degenerative disc disease, the physician must explain the nature of the
degenerative disc disease, how and why it is causing permanent disability at the time of the
evaluation, and how and why it is responsible for approximately 50% of the disability.
The WCAB then addressed the conclusions of the evaluating physician in Escobedo:
As discussed above, Dr. Ovadia opined that there is a “medically reasonable” basis for
apportionment: (1) because of the “trivial nature” of applicant’s October 28, 2002 left knee injury;
(2) because of the almost immediate onset of right knee symptoms after that injury; and (3)
because of the “obvious, significant degenerative arthritis in both knees” reflected in a pre-surgical
MRI of applicant’s left knee taken shortly after her October 28, 2002 injury and reflected in post-
surgical x-rays. Dr. Ovadia also stated, “it is medically probable that she would have had fifty
percent of her current level of knee disability at the time of today’s evaluation even in the absence
of her employment at Marshalls.
The WCJ was justified in concluding that Dr. Ovadia’s opinion meets the standards of section 4663
and that it is substantial evidence. That is, it appears that Dr. Ovadia based his opinion on an
adequate medical history, examination, and facts, and applicant’s petition does not contend
otherwise. Also, Dr. Ovadia’s opinion is not speculative, and it sets forth the reasoning behind his
conclusions. Further, he states his apportionment opinion in terms of reasonable medical
probability. Moreover, he assesses the relative percentages of industrial and non-industrial
causation based on the time of his evaluation of applicant. Finally, he makes his apportionment
determination by finding the approximate percentage of permanent disability caused by “other
factors,” i.e., her preexisting degenerative arthritis in both knees. (Dr. Ovadia’s finding that
approximately 50% of applicant’s permanent disability was caused by non-industrial factors
necessarily implies a finding that 50% of her permanent disability was directly caused by the
industrial injury.)
Counsel should always refer to these guidelines outlined clearly in the Escobedo case in evaluating the
conclusions of evaluating physicians in their MMI reports when the physicians address apportionment
of permanent disability. The WCAB en banc decision provides us with two examples of how to evaluate
apportionment of disability when an acute injury causes permanent disability when there is underlying
degenerative joint disease in knees or degenerative osteoarthritis in the spine. The language quoted
Page 22 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
above from the WCAB should serve as a template for any advocacy letter sent by defense counsel to
an evaluating physician. Attorneys who represent employees should be mindful of the language used
by the WCAB in Escobedo to try to convince a physician to minimize the effects of underlying
degenerative changes on causation of permanent disability when there is an acute industrial injury.
The difficulty of this analysis increases when a cumulative trauma industrial injury is alleged when there
is also underlying degenerative joint or disc disease. In those cases, the physicians need to parcel out
causation of permanent disability between industrial exposure and other factors in accordance with the
WCAB decision in Escobedo.
The Court of Appeal has given practitioners guidance after Escobedo in E.L. Yeager & Company v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Gatten) [(2006) 145 Cal. App. 4th 922, 52 Cal. Rptr. 3d 133, 71 Cal.
Comp. Cases 1687]. The main take away in Gatten is that the physician’s conclusions about
apportionment of permanent disability must be based upon reasonable medical probability. Just having
the physician say in his or her report or deposition that his or her conclusions are based on reasonable
medical probability is not enough—there has to be a nexus between a physician’s conclusions and the
medical facts in the case, with an analysis of apportionment based on the language of Labor Code
§ 4663 and the principles outlined in the Escobedo case.
In Gatten, the Applicant fell from a five-and-one-half foot wall, landed on his buttocks and was
diagnosed with a lumbar strain with a compression fracture at L2. Prior to this injury, the Applicant had
a history of occasional back pain and had received two or three chiropractic adjustments for low back
pain in the prior ten years. According to the evaluating physician, MRI diagnostic testing revealed
“dehydration and early degenerative changes at almost every disc in his lumbar spine which is a wear
and tear phenomenon where the fine structure of the discs begins to change and wear out, losses its
blood supply, and slowing starts to degenerate. This is a naturally occurring process that everyone
gets.” [see 71 Cal. Comp. Cases at 1689]. The physician assigned a 20% apportionment to the
Applicant’s degenerative disc disease process and 80% to the acute specific industrial injury. The trial
judge and WCAB panel found 74% permanent disability with no apportionment, indicating that there
was no evidence of a disability prior to the specific injury. The Court of Appeal reversed and held that
the physician’s conclusions on apportionment constituted substantial medical evidence. Although the
physician did not state in his report that his conclusions about apportionment were based on
reasonable medical probability, he affirmed this during his deposition testimony, which made his overall
conclusions compliant with the reasonable medical probability standard.
The Court of Appeal in Gatten stated: “The medical opinion must disclose familiarity with the concepts
of apportionment, describe in detail the exact nature of the apportionable disability, and set forth the
basis for the opinion so that the Board can determine whether the physician is properly apportioning
under correct legal principles.” [see 71 Cal. Comp. Cases at 1692]. In this case, the evaluating
physician based his opinion on apportionment of the MRI, which clearly showed degenerative disc
disease at almost every level of the Applicant’s lumbar spine and the fact that the Applicant had a prior
history of occasional back pain resulting in his seeking chiropractic treatment on two or three
occasions. The court reiterated the WCAB’s statement in Escobedo that “degenerative disease can be
asymptomatic and still apportionable under the new [apportionment] law.” [see 71 Cal. Comp. Cases at
1692]. The court then stated, at p. 1693:
We find nothing questionable about a medical expert’s reliance on an accepted diagnostic tool [i.e.
an MRI]. A medical expert may well view a person’s history of minor back problems as being more
significant in light of the evidence of substantial degeneration of the back shown by an MRI. Dr.
Akmakjian did so here. His conclusion cannot be disregarded as being speculative when it was
based on his expertise in evaluating the significance of these facts. This was a matter of scientific
medical knowledge and the Board impermissibly substituted its judgment for that of the medical
expert.
Finally, the 20 percent figure that Dr. Akmakjian used is based on his subjective evaluation, but we
cannot conclude that it is merely a random number that he settled upon, He himself noted that
apportionment would have been greater if Applicant had had more extensive treatment for his
back. On the other hand, the doctor may have given the Applicant a higher disability rating
Page 23 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
because he appeared to be in more pain than other patients with similar injuries because of the
preexisting pathology…the Applicant just did not have a normal back. The doctor made a
determination based on his medical expertise of the approximate percentage of permanent
disability caused by degenerative condition of the Applicant’s back.
The Escobedo and Gatten cases have endured since the 2005 and 2006 respective appellate
decisions. In considering apportionment, a physician should determine apportionment of permanent
disability utilizing the following factors:
• How severe a specific injury was in terms of impact (e.g., did the Applicant fall 3 feet off a chair or
12 feet off a ladder?)
• How arduous was the Applicant’s job as performed?
• How long did the Applicant perform repetitive or arduous job duties?
• Was there a gap in medical treatment to the same part of body from a prior injury (industrial or
non-industrial prior injury)?
• Was there continuous treatment from a prior injury to the same part of body that led up to a more
recent injury?
• Did the Applicant recover from a prior injury to the same part of body?
• What do the diagnostic imaging studies show after a prior injury or from prior medical treatment
for a non-industrial condition to the same part of body?
• Were diagnostic studies conducted soon after a specific injury that show degenerative changes
that could not have been caused by that specific injury?
• What does the chronology of medical events from when there were no signs, symptoms, or
complaints to the present time, reveal, if anything?
How do we deal with a prior award under Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664 when there is a new injury that
occurs after January 1, 2005 and is rated under the AMA Guides? Suppose there is a 39-year-old
nurse who sustains a low back injury in 1995 that resulted in a no heavy work restriction. That case
would rate 30% permanent disability after adjustment for age and occupation. Now, in 2005, the same
nurse has another lumbar spine injury. How would apportionment work in this case?
Can you subtract apples from oranges? The 1995 permanent disability was based upon work
restrictions. The 2005 permanent disability is based upon a spinal impairment under AMA Guides
Chapter 15, The Spine. So the 1997 Schedule is based upon loss of ability to compete in the open
labor market while the 2005 PDRS and 2013 PDRS are based upon the AMA Guides. Cases under the
1997 Schedule are the apples, and cases rated under the 2005 PDRS are the oranges.
One preliminary note: Since there is a reoccurrence of an injury to the nurse’s lumbar spine, the ROM
method would apply for rating the 2005 spinal injury [see Ch. 3, § 3.15 of this guidebook]. One other
note is that the following analysis applies regardless of whether the prior injury was industrially related
or not. The analysis applies under both Labor Code § 4664 for a prior award and Labor Code § 4663 for
a prior non-industrial injury with the same surgical results.
Can the WCJ subtract the prior percentage of permanent disability from the current permanent disability
that was rated from permanent impairment to permanent disability using the 2005 PDRS? No. There is
no way you can use the direct subtraction of percentages now mandated by Labor Code § 4664 and
current case law [see Brodie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2007) 40 Cal. 4th 1313, 72 Cal. Comp.
Cases 565]. This is because the percentages of permanent disability derived from impairment ratings
are totally different from the ratings based upon work restrictions. Another way to put it is that you
would be subtracting apples from oranges, which you cannot do. Therefore, there would be only two
ways apportionment can occur in this type of case, both under Labor Code § 4663:
Page 24 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
1. Have the treating or evaluating physician determine what impairment rating under the AMA
Guides the prior injury would have been and subtract that impairment rating from the current one;
or
2. Default to analyzing apportionment under Labor Code § 4663: What approximate percentage of
permanent disability is directly caused by the 2005 lumbar spine injury and approximately what
percentage of permanent disability is caused by other factors, including the prior 1995 industrial
lumbar spine injury?
AMA Guides Chapter 1 permits the first method mentioned above if the physician can rate the prior
injury using the AMA Guides retrospectively. For example, if the nurse had suffered a one level lumbar
disc herniation resulting in a laminectomy from the 1995 injury, then a physician today using the AMA
Guides could reasonably conclude that the nurse had a DRE Category III lumbar spine impairment
rating (between 10% and 13% WPI) if the physician can discover through review of records, reviewing
the applicant’s deposition, etc., that the nurse had surgery, and determine her quality of life afterwards.
The physician could then pinpoint approximately where within the DRE III category the nurse was when
she was declared permanent and stationary from the 1995 injury, based upon how well the nurse felt or
functioned after being released from care for the first injury. Since the ROM method would be used due
to the new injury to the lumbar spine in 2005, the physician would then subtract the DRE III rating from
the current ROM rating, which would be consistent with both Labor Code §§ 4664 and 4663.
Applicant’s counsel may object to the first method on the grounds that a retroactive DRE rating under
the AMA Guides is too speculative. Defense counsel may object since this method does not take into
account “other factors” besides the prior ratable injury. However, it is reasonable from an evidentiary
standpoint that this method could pass scrutiny by the WCAB as to whether the physician’s opinion that
gives a retroactive impairment rating constitutes substantial medical evidence. Again, the physician
would have to state how and why he or she came to his or her conclusions about a retroactive
impairment rating and the rationale for doing so.
We are also faced with the issue under Labor Code § 4663 about whether the nurse could argue that
her lumbar spine condition improved and she rehabilitated from the prior injury since the presumption of
Labor Code § 4664 cannot apply (remember, you cannot subtract apples from oranges) [see Kopping v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2006) 142 Cal. App. 4th 1099, 48 Cal. Rptr. 3d 618, 71 Cal. Comp.
Cases 1229].
But what if the nurse injures her neck instead of her lumbar spine in 2005? How does apportionment
work when the prior spinal award or injury was to the lumbar spine and the new industrial injury is to the
cervical spine? Is there consideration for overlap? Is there such a thing as overlap and duplication in
AMA Guides cases?
If the nurse has a prior lumbar spine award of 30% permanent disability based upon the 1995 injury
and she now has a DRE Category IV 25% cervical spine impairment, is there any adjustment to the
cervical spine rating on account of the prior award to the lumbar spine? Maybe not, even though the
impairments are within the same region, i.e., the spine. Remember, Labor Code § 4664(c)(1) and (c)(2)
mandate that an impairment rating cannot exceed 100% in a person’s life time for any single body
region, including the spine. In this case, it is arguable that a cervical spine injury results in separate
impairments than a lumbar spine injury.
If the nurse had both cervical and lumbar spine injury in 2005, each impairment rating would be
combined using the Combined Values Chart and then rated for permanent disability with any “overlap”
being covered by the Combined Values Chart [see 2005 PDRS, page 1-11].
However, the 2005 PDRS at page 1-5 states:
It is not always appropriate to combine all impairment standards resulting from a single injury,
since two or more impairments may have a duplicative effect on the function of the injured body
part. The AMA Guides provide some direction on what impairments can be used in combination.
Lacking such guidance, it is necessary for the evaluating physician to exercise his or her judgment
in avoiding duplication.
Page 25 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
One example would involve a single injury to the elbow and shoulder of the same arm resulting in
muscle strength deficits—reduced strength of the elbow would probably overlap with reduced muscle
strength in the shoulder. Notice here that the 2005 PDRS refers to multiple impairments resulting from
a single injury to the same region. It is doubtful that this rule in the 2005 PDRS would apply to
impairments to different regions of the body from the same injury.
Therefore, it is an open question about whether duplication and overlap occur in AMA Guides cases.
Defendants may want to make the medical-legal argument that there is overlap and duplication for
impairments that occur within the same region such as in spinal injury cases involving impairments to
the cervical and lumbar spine caused by the same injury. Applicant’s counsel may argue that Labor
Code § 4664(c)(1) and (c)(2) already account for overlap and duplication as does the application of the
Combined Values Chart.
However, in the example above involving the nurse, since the lumbar spinal injury and the cervical
spinal injury occurred separately, 10 years apart, there is probably no overlap or duplication unless it
can be proved that the effects on the applicant’s ADL functioning for each injury overlap in some
manner. One can argue that ADL functioning is affected differently for a lumbar impairment than they
are by a cervical spinal impairment.
A clear example is in a cumulative trauma case for a machinist who develops over time a shoulder
injury that results in a distal clavicle resection arthroplasty (the joint where the collar bone meets the
shoulder is removed; see Ch. 8 of this guidebook for a discussion of this procedure called a “Mumford
procedure”). She returns to work and continues to perform arduous work as a machinist and, 10 years
after the shoulder surgery, she develops additional objective shoulder pathology that an AME attributes
to further cumulative trauma work activities. The AME then properly apportions the distal clavicle
resection arthroplasty by citing Table 16-27, which lists that procedure as a 10% upper extremity
impairment (6% WPI) and subtracts that from the current upper extremity rating that includes other
factors.
[ii] Risk Factors and Causation of Permanent Disability
In the struggle to determine apportionment of permanent disability under Labor Code §§ 4663 and
4664, physicians, attorneys, and judges are now confronted by the role, if any, of risk factors to
apportionment to causation. In every case to determine causation of permanent disability, can a
physician apportion to “other factors” to include such risk factors as genetics, age, gender, family
history, race, national origin, or life-style choices, such as smoking, a high cholesterol diet, or lack of
exercise?
Remember, a risk factor is not a pathology or a disease process itself. For example, high cholesterol is
a risk factor for heart disease and stroke in the long term, but it may not be causing disability at a given
time. But can apportionment of causation of permanent disability to risk factors be appropriate?
For example, smoking is clearly a risk factor for the development of heart or lung disease, but smoking
is not itself a disease entity. The problem with risk factors is that they are based upon statistics.
Statistics show that the risk of smokers for the development of heart or lung disease is higher than for
non-smokers but in reality some smokers never get heart or lung disease.
The same is true for hypertension or diabetes—an injured employee may have a strong family history
of those disease entities, but there is no direct evidence that the offspring of hypertensive or diabetic
parents are doomed to have hypertension or diabetes. So how can a physician conclude with
reasonable medical probability that an applicant, who is claiming that stress on the job caused,
aggravated, or accelerated the development of his or her hypertension, also has significant
apportionment to risk factors, such as a strong family history, when, in fact, there is no evidence that
the risk factor itself is causing permanent disability?
This argument sounds quite persuasive, but what is missing from the analysis from a defense
perspective is that stress is also a “risk factor” that must be considered along with other risk factors.
Some people who have significant occupational stress do not develop heart disease or hypertension
even though they have a strong family history of those conditions.
Page 26 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
The debate continues on the applicant’s side that risk factors only are considered for causation of an
injury and cannot be considered as part of what causes the permanent impairment—but for the
industrial injury or exposure, the applicant would not have suffered a heart attack, stroke, etc.
Resolution of the role of risk factors that underlie an industrially related medical condition must be
determined by reasonable medical probability, with the physician explaining how and why a risk factor
is causing permanent disability in accordance with the analysis outlined in the Escobedo case
discussed above.
The WCAB has reiterated its position that the burden of proving apportionment rests on the defendant
and that a defendant’s failure to provide an adequate basis for apportionment requires a finding that
there is none [Pullman Kellogg v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1980) 26 Cal. 3d 450, 161 Cal. Rptr.
783, 45 Cal. Comp. Cases 170]. In order to validly apportion permanent disability to a risk factor, a
physician must, with reasonable medical probability, indicate that an applicant personally suffers from
an underlying pathology.
Physicians must distinguish between the causation of the applicant’s injury, e.g., elevated cholesterol
levels that placed him or her at greater risk of heart disease or stroke, and the causation of the
applicant’s disability. Physicians must understand the language of the WCAB in Escobedo, which
reads: “[T]he percentage to which an applicant’s injury is causally related to his or her employment is
not necessarily the same as the percentage to which an applicant’s permanent disability is causally
related to his or her injury.”
The debate and discussions over the role of risk factors in causing permanent disability will continue
until there are appellate decisions that establish the level of proof required to allow valid apportionment
to a risk factor. The question of a genetic pre-disposition to certain diseases will also evolve since the
science behind genetic testing for certain pre-dispositions is becoming more accurate, reliable, and
available in mainstream clinical medicine. An employee’s right to medical privacy concerning genetic
testing has yet to be tested in the courts in a California workers’ compensation case. However, even if
an applicant has a genetic pre-disposition to a disease process, if an industrial injury occurs that lights
up the condition, then the discussion about what caused the injury and what caused the permanent
disability will be in the forefront of our case law development in the very near future.
In late May 2008, Congress passed and the President signed into law the landmark H.R. 493 Genetic
Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (“GINA”). This act amends federal law, including the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Employment Retirement and Income Security Act of 1974, the Public
Health Service Act, Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and the Social Security Act and prohibits
discrimination on the basis of genetic information with respect to health insurance and employment.
Section 202(a) of GINA states, in relevant part as follows:
Discrimination Based on Genetic Information—It shall be unlawful employment practice for an
employer—
(1) to fail or refuse to hire, or to discharge, any employee, or otherwise to discriminate against any
employee with respect to the compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment of the
employee, because of genetic information with respect to the employee; or
(2) to limit, segregate, or classify the employees of the employer in any way that would deprive or
tend to deprive any employee of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect the status
of the employee, because of genetic information with respect to the employee.
Section 202(b) of GINA states. in relevant part, as follows:
Acquisition of Genetic Information—It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to
request, require, or purchase genetic information with respect to an employee or a family member
of an employee, except …
The exceptions pertain to inadvertent genetic information disclosed by the employee to the employer,
genetic monitoring for hazardous exposures where required by federal or state occupational safety
laws or for an employee’s compliance with certification under the Family Medical Leave Act of 1993 [29
U.S.C.S. § 2613] or state family and medical leave acts.
Page 27 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
Genetic information is now protected health information under both federal and state laws and is strictly
protected against disclosure for insurability, insurance premium calculations and for employment.
California law already has significant statutory protections against disclosure of genetic information for
insurability, housing and employability. See especially Civil Code § 56.17 (penalties for unauthorized
disclosure of genetic information), Government Code §§ 12926(h)(2)(A) and (B) and 12940(o), which
are part of the Fair Employment and Housing Act, Government Code § 6276.22, which is part of the
Public Records Act, Insurance Code §§ 10123.35 and 10140.1, and Health and Safety Code
§ 1374.7(d), which all prohibit discrimination due to genetic information for the purpose of granting or
denying group or individual health insurance coverage or establishing insurance premium rates.
Typical language in California law that defines “genetic information” or “genetic characteristics” that is
prohibited from unauthorized disclosure is as follows:
Any scientifically or medically identifiable gene or chromosome or combination of alteration thereof,
that is known to be a cause of a disease or disorder in a person or his or her offspring, or that is
determined to be associated with a statistically increased risk of development of a disease or
disorder, and that is presently not associated with any symptoms of any disease or disorder. Or
Inherited characteristics that may derive from the individual or family member, that are known to be
a cause of a disease or disorder in a person or his or her offspring, or that are determined to be
associated with a statistically increased risk of development of a disease or disorder, and that are
presently not associated with any symptoms of any disease or disorder. [See Health and Safety
Code § 1374.7].
An interesting aspect of the federal GINA is that the protections against discrimination on the basis of
genetic information are applicable for individuals through the fourth degree of relatives while the
protections under California law apply only to “offspring”, which is to the first degree.
Current research is leading towards discovery of potential genetic links to many disorders and disease
processes. The Human Genome Project (Human Genome Research Institute of the National Institutes
of Health www.nih.gov) is in the process of investigating many common medical conditions to search
for genetic causes. However, there is a difference between a genetic characteristic or genetic
information being a “risk factor” and being a direct cause of a medical condition or impairment.
Remember, a risk factor for anything is based upon a statistical probability and has nothing to do with
predicting whether any given individual will develop a medical condition, disease process or pathology.
A risk factor is not pathology and does not cause permanent impairment [see American Airlines v.
Workers’ Comp. App. Bd. (Milivojevich) (2007) 72 Cal. Comp. Cases 1415 (writ denied) (high
cholesterol is a risk factor for stroke and heart disease, but many people who have high cholesterol
never develop heart disease or have a stroke; therefore, apportionment to high cholesterol in a stroke
case was not valid apportionment under Escobedo case)]. For example, we know that the African
American population has a higher incidence of hypertension than other racial groups. But that does not
mean that a given person will in fact develop hypertension simply because his or her genetic
characteristics include being African American.
There is some evidence that opioid addiction (heroin, vicodin, oxycontin, Percocet, morphine,
Methadone, hydrocodone, etc.) or some people with alcohol dependency or addiction may have a
genetic link because there seems to be increased probabilities that these conditions run in families
along blood lines. Some mental illnesses, such as some forms of schizophrenia or depression, may
also have a genetic link. Science is able to identify some genetic abnormalities or “genetic markers”
(called single nucleotide polymorphisms or “SNAPS”) or mutations in DNA that lead to a disease
process or medical condition. If an industrial injury triggers or lights up a medical condition due to a
genetic pre-disposition for that medical condition, then causation of the injury may be in part due to
genetic factors.
The slippery slope occurs when the legal analysis gets to the question of causation of any permanent
impairment from that medical condition and whether an alleged genetic pre-disposition can cause part
or all of an impairment rating if environmental factors such as a work injury lights up or causes that
medical condition to manifest itself. Counsel is only too familiar with the legal argument that “but for the
Page 28 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
industrial injury the medical condition would not have developed as and when it did.” But science and
medicine do not think that simplistically—remember, Chapter 2 of the AMA Guides advises that there
are 12 different kinds of medical causation.
So the questions remain, can an employer contend in a workers’ compensation claim that an injured
worker’s genetic characteristics or genetic information is a factor that causes the injury itself or
contributes to a permanent impairment? Can an employer compel a genetic test to determine whether
an employee who is claiming an industrial injury would have developed a medical condition anyways
regardless of industrial exposures due to his or her genetic information or characteristics? Can an
injured worker be compelled to disclose his or her family history of heart disease, hypertension or
diabetes? Does such disclosure violate GINA or California law?
The answers to these questions depend upon the reliability of the evidence submitted to support a
request to compel disclosure of such information and the reliability and validity that a particular medical
condition even has a genetic factor causing the condition or the consequences of that condition. It is
safe to say that there is reasonable discovery for a treating or evaluating physician to determine a
person’s family history of disease or disability to rule in or rule out genetic information as a contributing
factor to the cause of a disorder or impairment from one. But it appears that actual genetic testing is out
of the question unless and until a judge orders it.
However, answers to these questions get murkier when you deal with a specific medical condition for
which there is a genetic predisposition but an industrial injury lights up that medical condition and but
for the industrial exposure, the medical condition would not have occurred as and when it did. Case law
will have to determine resolution of these issues. But a cautionary note is needed here—we know from
our legal history that advances in science and medicine occur far quicker than advances in law. The
law takes time to catch up with advances in science and medicine and how to deal with the legal
consequences of scientific study and discovery. The courts have gradually come to realize the
necessity of having advances in science and medicine correspond with advances in the law with legal
standards changing as the scientific advances occur [see, e.g., Daubert v. Merrill Dow Pharmaceuticals
(1993) 509 U.S. 579, 113 S. Ct. 2786, 125 L. Ed. 2d 469].
One of the first cases that addresses these issues is the recent unpublished Court of Appeal case Vaira
v. Workers’ Comp. App. Bd. [(2008) 72 Cal. Comp. Cases 1586 (court of appeal opinion not published
in official reports)], in which the court concluded that the WCAB cannot use risk factors of injury or age
per se (osteoporosis in a 73-year-old employee) in apportioning causation of disability or impairments.
We look forward to further guidance from the courts as science and medicine also progresses.
In every case, since medical evidence is driven by reasonable medical probabilities, physicians must
indicate in their conclusions how and why risk factors are playing a role in causing permanent disability.
The development of the record by legal counsel is crucial in this regard so that a judge can weigh the
evidence and determine whether a conclusion that a risk factor is causing permanent disability
constitutes substantial evidence.
[iii] Inextricably Intertwined—Benson Revisited and the AMA Guides
In their decision in Benson what exactly did the Court of Appeal and WCAB say about multiple claims
or successive injuries being “inextricably intertwined” in determining apportionment of disability under
Labor Code § 4663? Did the Court of Appeal and WCAB actually use the phrase “inextricably
intertwined?” Can you say “inextricably intertwined” ten times fast with two Sapphire Tonics on board?
The answers are “no, no and no!” [see Benson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2009) 170 Cal. App.
4th 1535, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113; Benson v. The Permanente Medical Group (2007) 72 Cal. Comp.
Cases 1620 (Appeals Board en banc decision)].
In order to fully understand the medical evidence on apportionment that a treating or evaluating
physician is required to provide to the parties and ultimately to a judge, you have to understand exactly
what the WCAB said about the duties of the physician in determining apportionment of disability and
what happens if a physician can’t.
Page 29 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
The Wilkinson doctrine basically said that an employee who sustains successive industrial injuries to
the same part of body, and becomes permanent and stationary at the same time, is entitled to one
combined permanent disability award [see Wilkinson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1977) 19 Cal. 3d
491, 42 Cal. Comp. Cases 406 (hereinafter “Wilkinson”)]. The Wilkinson doctrine was based on Labor
Code § 4750, which was repealed under SB 899 and replaced by current Labor Code §§ 4663 and
4664, which require a determination of apportionment based on causation. Under the Benson
decisions, the WCAB and later the Court of Appeal adopted the finding that the Wilkinson doctrine itself
was intentionally repealed by the legislature in SB 899.
So now, if there are successive injuries to the same part of body, then the physician must assume that
in most cases, “apportionment based on causation requires that each distinct industrial injury be
separately compensated based on its individual contribution to a permanent disability” [see Benson v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2009) 170 Cal. App. 4th 1535, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113, 133].
On the question of what a physician is required to do in all cases in determining apportionment to prior
industrial injuries, non-industrial factors and any subsequent industrial or non-industrial injuries, the
Court of Appeal and WCAB cited Labor Code § 4663(c), which states as follows:
In order for a physician’s report to be considered complete on the issue of permanent disability, the
report must include an apportionment determination. A physician shall make an apportionment
determination by finding what approximate percentage of the permanent disability was caused by
the direct result of injury arising out of and occurring in the course of employment and what
approximate percentage of the permanent disability was caused by other factors both before and
subsequent to the industrial injury, including prior industrial injuries. If the physician is unable to
include an apportionment determination in his or her report, the physician shall state the specific
reasons why the physician could not make a determination of the effect of that prior condition on
the permanent disability arising from the injury. The physician shall then consult with other
physicians or refer the employee to another physician from whom the employee is authorized to
seek treatment or evaluation in accordance with this division in order to make the final
determination.
So when can a physician combine permanent disability from two distinct industrial injuries to the same
part of body and avoid separate and distinct awards? Both the WCAB and the Court of Appeal, which
adopted the WCAB en banc decision language, answer that question without using terms like
“inextricably intertwined”. The court’s opinion states at 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 133:
We also agree that there may be limited circumstances, not present here, when the evaluating
physician cannot parcel out, with reasonable medical probability, the approximate percentages to
which each distinct industrial injury causally contributed to the employee’s overall permanent
disability. In such limited circumstances, when the employer has failed to meet its burden of proof,
a combined award of permanent disability may still be justified. (See § 4663 subd. (c); Kopping v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd., supra, 142 Cal.App.4th at p. 1115 …)
The WCAB in its en banc decision and at footnote 3 in the Court of Appeal opinion at 74 Cal. Comp.
Cases 116 state:
… “We observe, however, that there may be limited circumstances, not present here, where the
evaluating physician cannot parcel out, with reasonable medical probability, the approximate
percentages to which each successive injury causally contributed to the employee’s overall
permanent disability. Under these limited circumstances, a combined award of permanent disability
may still be justified.” “In such an instance, the physician’s apportionment ‘determination’, within
the meaning of Labor Code § 4663, could properly be that the approximate percentages of
disability caused by each of the successive injuries cannot reasonably be determined. As a result,
the employee would be entitled to an undivided (i.e. joint and several) award for the combined
permanent disability, because the respective defendants would have failed in their burdens of
proof on the issue of apportionment. (Kopping v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2006) 142
Cal.App.4th 1099, 1115 [71 Cal.Comp.Cases 1229, 1242].)”
Page 30 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
So you can see, there is no discussion or use of “inextricably intertwined” or similar language used in
either the Court of Appeal or WCAB en banc decisions. Now remember, the permanent disability
involved in Wilkinson was two specific injuries to the applicant’s same knee, two months apart.
The permanent disability in Benson was to the applicant’s neck in a specific injury (a medical file clerk
reaching for a file bin) and an eleven-year continuous trauma to the neck due to the repetitive use of
the neck and upper extremities, resulting in a three-level spinal fusion. The permanent disability
determinations in both Wilkinson and Benson relied on permanent disability rating schedules that were
based on work restrictions and were not based on objective medical findings or impairments under the
AMA Guides.
In looking at Dr. Izzo’s conclusions as the AME in Benson that 50% of the applicant’s permanent
disability was due to the specific injury in June 2003 and 50% was due to continuous trauma, it seems
to have been an afterthought, more than as a result of careful medical analysis. Remember, there was
no continuous trauma claim filed until after everyone received Dr. Izzo’s report! He could have simply
concluded that the incident that occurred in June 2003 while reaching for the file bin was part of one
injury—a continuous trauma—and Ms. Benson would have received her 61% award.
We are seeing this creativity when we ask physicians during depositions, “Didn’t one of these injuries
cause 0% permanent disability, and the other one caused the entire amount of permanent disability in
this case?” What if Dr. Izzo had concluded that 99% of Ms. Benson’s permanent disability was caused
by continuous trauma and 1% caused by the June 2003 incident? Would this have passed muster
under Labor Code § 4663(c)? Probably so, if Dr. Izzo had explained how and why.
If Benson had involved a permanent impairment rating under the AMA Guides, it is probable that Dr.
Izzo would have been hard-pressed to even consider the June 2003 specific incident a separate and
distinct injury from a cumulative trauma injury. Why? Because the extent of pathology that results in a
three-level cervical fusion probably did not occur in one day, nor does the impairment arising from it.
How and why did he arrive at 50% to the specific and 50% to the continuous trauma in the first place?
It is empirically easier to “parcel out” percentages of causation of permanent disability when the
disability is based on work restrictions than when it is based on permanent objective medical findings
as now required under the AMA Guides. In Benson, how can any physician with reasonable medical
probability say that the incident in June 2003 of reaching for a file bin caused any permanent
impairment? Wasn’t the impairment already progressed from a pristine cervical spine to a diseased one
that required a three-level fusion? In the absence of any specific pathology that can be linked to a
specific injury, it is probably virtually impossible for any physician to determine causation of permanent
disability in these cases.
This is even more complex when an impairment under the AMA Guides is not only caused by the
industrial injuries themselves (such as two specific injuries in Wilkinson and a specific and continuous
trauma injuries in Benson) but also by failed medical treatment afterwards, such as a chronic pain
syndrome case that is caused by failed spinal surgery. No physician on this planet could “parcel out”
permanent disability between successive injuries when the majority of the resulting impairment is
caused by the medical treatment from both injuries.
There is a big problem under Benson when the permanent disability is based on impairment of function,
anatomic loss, diagnosis based or from a combination of these factors as now required under the AMA
Guides. How can anyone tell, with reasonable medical probability, that a herniated disc, entrapped
median nerve (carpal tunnel syndrome), torn meniscus in knees or a torn rotator cuff in the shoulder are
caused by successive injuries and “parceled out” as to causation of permanent disability? How do you
say, “Speculation”?
The construct in Benson makes perfect sense from a legal standpoint when it comes to the intent of the
legislature to require disability based on causation and to no longer allow evidence of rehabilitation
from a prior award and to apportion to pathology, prior and subsequent injuries and retroactive
prophylactic work restrictions. But it is another universe we have entered into when it comes to
determining causation of impairment in successive injury cases to the same part of body.
Page 31 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
Under the AMA Guides, the impairment rating must be based on objective medical findings, limitation of
function and a solid diagnosis, most of which cannot be distinguished if the cause is from successive
injuries. There certainly must be some objective evidence in place between two successive injuries to
justify a physician to “parcel out” apportionment between them under the AMA Guides. It would have
been helpful if Mr. Wilkinson had an MRI scan of his knee after the first injury and again after the
second one so that his physician under the AMA Guides could have told us what percentage of
impairment is caused by each injury, even though they occurred two months apart! Fortunately Mr.
Wilkinson does not have to worry about the AMA Guides—you get the point.
What about the mandate under Labor Code § 4663(c) that says that if a physician cannot parcel out
apportionment between successive injuries, he or she must consult with another physician or refer the
applicant out to another treating or evaluating physician for that purpose? Does this mean defendants
have a right to doctor shop until they find the right doctor to speculate about apportionment? What if an
AME cannot parcel out the apportionment between successive injuries? After all, an AME becomes
both parties’ physician under current law? See Green v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2005) 127 Cal.
App. 4th 1426, 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 294], where the Court of Appeal stated: “We agree with Green
that the opinions of Drs. Weiss and Fauget as agreed medical examiners may result in liability for
increased compensation under new section 5814. Green and City deferred the medical issues to Drs.
Weiss and Fauget, whose opinions became in effect the opinions of each party’s physician under
Berry.” [citing Berry v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1969) 276 Cal. App. 2d 381, 34 Cal. Comp. Cases
507]
So there we have it. Every physician must try and parcel out apportionment between successive
industrial injuries. If they cannot, they must say so and indicate that they have either consulted with
another physician or referred the applicant to another physician to do so. All of this is required by Labor
Code § 4663(c) and both decisions in Benson. Under the AMA Guides in many cases, it will be
impossible for any physician to be able to make an apportionment determination between successive
injuries because we are no longer dealing with work restrictions but are instead dealing with real
medicine.
When you have successive injury cases, defense counsel must be sure to have these issues in mind
and prepare to take the AME, panel QME or treating physician’s deposition. If defense counsel does
not refute a physician’s conclusion that it is impossible to “parcel out” apportionment of permanent
disability between successive injuries to the same part of body that becomes permanent and stationary
at the same time, defendant fails to meet its burden of proving apportionment under Benson under the
mandate of Kopping v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2006) 142 Cal. App. 4th 1099, 48 Cal. Rptr. 3d
618, 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1229] and the applicant gets a combined award. We wish the WCAB or
Court of Appeal had said this whole thing is “inextricably intertwined!”
How does Benson [Benson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2009) 170 Cal. App. 4th 1535, 89 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 166, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113] apply during the SB 863 era in which we are now entering?
There is no case law on the issue to be discussed here, but there will be soon enough. But first, some
history is necessary.
In 2004, as part of SB 899, the legislature enacted Labor Code § 4660(d), which spawned a lot of
litigation over the question of which Permanent Disability Rating Schedule (PDRS) applies in a given
case. Labor Code § 4660(d) states that the 2005 PDRS and not the 1997 PDRS must be used unless
one of three things applies: (1) the injured worker was declared permanent and stationary prior to
1/1/05; (2) a medical report indicates the existence of permanent disability prior to 1/1/05; or (3) the
claims administrator was required to send a notice regarding permanent disability prior to 1/1/05. We
have conflicting Court of Appeal decisions on the subject [compare Vera v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. (2007) 154 Cal. App. 4th 996, 65 Cal. Rptr. 3d 151, 72 Cal. Comp. Cases 1115 with Genlyte Group
v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Zavala) (2008) 158 Cal. App. 4th 705, 69 Cal. Rptr. 3d 903, 73 Cal.
Comp. Cases 6].
In SB 863, this issue is completely avoided—everything is simply dictated by the date of injury. But the
problem is that the permanent disability rating string for a pre-2013 date of injury is different from a
Page 32 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
rating string for a 2013 or later date of injury. How does apportionment under Labor Code § 4663 work
between an injury occurring prior to 1/1/13 and one that occurs on or after 1/1/13? If there are
overlapping body parts between the two injuries, how are they combined in order to have a final
permanent disability rating? Do you apportion WPI ratings before you adjust for DFEC or the 1.4
adjustment factor and then adjust for occupation and age?
Take, for example, a 55-year-old electrician (occupational group 380) who sustains an admitted knee
and lumbar spinal injury on August 31, 2012 (or any date between 1/1/05 and 12/31/12) and another
injury to the lumbar spine in 2013 or later (CT or specific).
How do you do a rating if the AME or PQME and the treating physician agree:
• The injured worker has a total knee replacement that has a “fair” result (AMA Guides Tables 16-
35 and 16-33) and rates a 20% WPI and is caused solely by the specific injury in 2012.
• The lumbar spine using the Range of Motion method rates 20% WPI and is caused 25% due to
the 2012 injury and 75% due to the 2013 injury.
For injuries occurring between 1/1/05 and 12/31/12, each WPI rating would be multiplied times one of
eight DFEC adjustment factors and then adjusted for the injured worker’s occupation and age as of the
date of injury. See the 2005 PDRS, Table A and the instructions for DFEC adjustments on pages 1-5
through 1-7. In our example, the 2012 injury would result in the knee rating with the DFEC of Rank 2,
which is a 14% increase so the DFEC adjustment Rank 2 would be [20% WPI × 1.14] then adjusted for
occupation and age:
17.05.10.08 – 20 – [2]23 – 380I – 31 – 36
If the lumbar spinal impairment (ROM) was solely caused by the 2012 injury, the DFEC adjustment
factor is a Rank 5 or 27% increase of the WPI [20% WPI × 1.27]:
15.03.02.02 – 20 – [5]25 – 380H – 30 – 35
But since 75% of the lumbar spinal impairment is due to the 2013 injury, there is no DFEC adjustment
factor from the 2005 PDRS. Instead, there would be the 1.4 adjustment factor from SB 863 Labor Code
§ 4660.1 and then apportionment would be 25% to the 2012 DOI and 75% due to the 2013 DOI:
15.03.02.02 – 20 – (20 × 1.4) 28 – 380H – 34 – 39
The 1.4 adjustment factor mandated in SB 863 for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/13 would apply for
the entire WPI rating for the lumbar spine and then apportionment would apply between the injuries.
Unless and until there is case law to the contrary, part of the lumbar spine rating for the 2012 date of
injury may be subject to the 1.4 adjustment factor since you do not do apportionment until after the
rating string has been completed and you know what the actual permanent disability rating is before
apportionment for non-industrial factors and between the injuries in accordance with Benson.
Essentially, SB 863 creates a third level of apportionment—the first one for consideration of non-
industrial factors, the second one based on Benson, and a third new level—apportionment between a
pre-2013 injury and a post-2013 injury with overlapping parts of body injured between them. Do you
think the WCAB or appellate courts will require apportionment of WPI instead of permanent disability to
avoid the use of the 1.4 adjustment factor for the part of permanent disability that is apportioned to a
pre-2013 date of injury?
In our example, assume that the evaluating and treating physicians agree that there is no
apportionment to non-industrial factors but 25% of the lumbar spinal impairment is directly caused by
the 2012 injury and 75% of the impairment is caused by the 2013 injury:
• 25% (39) = 10% PD apportioned to 2012 DOI
• 75% (39) = 29% PD apportioned to 2013 DOI
How are both lumbar spine and knee permanent disability ratings combined when they overlap
between the 2012 and 2013 dates of injury? Remember, apportionment of disability is a legal
Page 33 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
conclusion based on valid medical evidence [see Lab. Code § 4663(b), (c); see also Brodie v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (2007) 40 Cal. 4th 1313, 57 Cal. Rptr. 3d 644, 72 Cal. Comp. Cases 565;
Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604, 621 (Appeals Board en banc decision); E.L.
Yeager Construction v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Gatten) (2006) 145 Cal. App. 4th 922, 52 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 133, 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1687]. You do not apportion WPI ratings; rather, you apportion
permanent disability ratings in accordance with Labor Code §§ 4663, 4664, or both. So once you
complete the rating string for each WPI rating, then you apply principles of apportionment under the
Escobedo, Gatten, and Benson cases.
So the final rating in our example for the 2012 date of injury looks like this:
Knee: 100% (17.05.10.08 – 20 – [2]23 – 380I – 31 – 36) = 36%
Back: 25% (15.03.02.02 – 20 – (20 × 1.4) 28 – 380H – 34 – 39) = 10% PD
36% COMBINED 10% = 42% PD
The final rating for the 2013 date of injury looks like this:
75% (15.03.02.02 – 20 – (20 × 1.4) 28 – 380H – 34 – 39) = 29% PD
The injured worker under Benson would receive two awards—a 42% permanent disability award for the
knee and lumbar spine for the 2012 date of injury, and a 29% award for the lumbar spine for the 2013
date of injury. However, Defendant could make the argument that only the portion of the WPI rating that
is attributed to the 2012 injury is rated using the DFEC adjustment factor for that part of body and the
remaining portion of the WPI rating that is caused by the 2013 and later injury is subject to the 1.4
adjustment factor. These considerations become more important when a permanent disability rating
reaches close to the thresholds of 55%, 70% or near 100% permanent disability.
We no longer have to argue and litigate the issue of which PDRS applies in a case with a moving target
of a permanent and stationary date, an indication of permanent disability, or a notice requirement.
Instead, we will be litigating whether the 1.4 adjustment factor that replaces the eight DFEC Ranks
applies to pre-2013 dates of injury when there is permanent disability that involves a body part injured
before and after 1/1/13.
All of this is subject to judicial and appellate interpretation that we look forward to soon.
[iv] Can a Risk Factor Become Causative?
The number one question on the minds of many evaluating and treating physicians is what is the role of
risk factors on the question of apportionment of permanent disability as required under Labor Code
§§ 4663 and 4664?
Both Labor Code sections require physicians to determine how much permanent disability is directly
caused by an industrial injury and how much is caused by “other factors,” such as pathology, pre-
existing or subsequent injuries or retroactive work restrictions [see Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70
Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]. Then the physician shall “parcel out”
percentages of disability to each industrial injury if there are successive industrial injuries to the same
part of body that become permanent and stationary at the same time [see Benson v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (2009) 170 Cal. App. 4th 1535, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113].
Physicians need to only consider two published cases in order to determine apportionment from a
strictly medical standpoint—Escobedo, cited above, and E.L. Yeager v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(Gatten) [(2006) 145 Cal. App. 4th 922, 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1687]. The Gatten case simply states
that a medical report constitutes substantial evidence on apportionment if the physician indicates
approximately what percentage of permanent disability is directly caused by an industrial injury and
what percentage is caused by other factors based on reasonable medical probability and the
physician’s experience, knowledge, education, abilities and skills.
But what about the influence of such risk factors as obesity, age, gender, race, smoking, and genetics?
How do these risk factors play into consideration of apportionment in alleged industrial injuries to the
heart, hypertension, diabetes and other internal medical conditions? More than sixteen years after SB
899 was enacted, there are no WCAB en banc, Court of Appeal or Supreme Court published decisions
Page 34 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
that address the role of risk factors in apportionment in a case involving an internal medical condition
such as heart disease, hypertension or diabetes.
However, from a medical standpoint, a risk factor is not a pathology; rather, it is a possible contributing
factor to causation of a disease process. See the WCAB panel decision denied judicial review in
American Airlines v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Milivojevich) [(2007) 72 Cal. Comp. Cases 1415
(writ denied) (hyperlipidemia (high cholesterol) was only a risk factor but not causative of heart disease,
and apportionment was not permitted)]. See also the unpublished court of appeal case Vaira v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2008) 72 Cal. Comp. Cases 1596 (court of appeal opinion not published
in the official reports)] in which the court concluded that the WCAB cannot use the risk factors of injury
or age per se (osteoporosis in a 73-year-old employee) in apportioning causation of disability or
impairments. The length of time a risk factor has been in existence, such as osteoporosis, can be a
causative factor of an impairment or disability. In these cases, it appears that the risk factor itself must
evolve into an actual medical pathology and is not merely a risk of developing a medical condition that
causes impairment of function.
Remember, the Escobedo and Gatten cases involved injured workers who had orthopedic medical
conditions that included degenerative disc disease (Mr. Gatten’s low back) or degenerative joint
disease (Mrs. Escobedo’s knee), and those cases did not involve risk factors such as what could affect
an internal medical condition like heart disease, high blood pressure or diabetes. In cases that involve
claims of industrial injury to the heart, hypertension and aggravation of diabetes, the decisions in
Escobedo and Gatten may not give any guidelines as examples.
We know that if you put 100 people in the same room who are considered “obese” or who have a 20-
pack-a-year smoking history or who are African-American men or people over the age of 60 from
Eastern European descent, you cannot predict with reasonable medical probability who within any such
homogenous group would develop heart disease, hypertension or diabetes. Similarly, in a room with
100 women over the age of 80, you cannot predict with reasonable medical probability which ones are
able to play a game of tennis, based on diagnostic imaging of everyone’s spine, and which ones cannot
due to degenerative arthritis. Isn’t degenerative arthritis a pathology and not a risk factor? So you can
see how complicated this whole area of apportionment due to pathology or risk factors is and how it
takes physicians down a slippery slope.
You may argue that stress is a “risk factor” as well and, if you put 100 people in a room who are in
stressful jobs, you cannot predict with reasonable medical probability who in that group will develop
heart disease, hypertension or diabetes. However, there is the argument that stress is a pathology, too,
since we know there are biochemical reactions to physical and emotional stress, i.e., an increase in
catecholamines that affect blood pressure, heart rate and the vascular system.
We know that a risk factor is not a “pathology” because risk factors for anything are based on statistical
probabilities and epidemiological data. Individuals with a risk factor, such as obesity, old age, gender,
smoking, sedentary lifestyle, etc., has nothing to do with predicting whether any given individual will
develop a medical condition, disease process or impairment of function.
Physicians are scientists by training, education, experience, and skill. They want exactitude for the
diagnosis, treatment, prognosis, causation of a medical condition, and reasonable scientific certainty for
outcomes. The medical-legal issue of apportionment of permanent disability is a troubling area for
physicians to get their arms around because it is a non-scientific albatross. There is no exactitude in
the final analysis of “approximately what percentage of permanent disability is directly caused by the
industrial injury and what percentage of permanent disability is caused by other factors.” There is also
confusion over what causes an industrial injury and what causes permanent disability, which are two
separate medical-legal analyses required by physicians in every case.
All physicians can do is use his or her best clinical judgment based on the history of the patient and the
physician’s analysis of all pertinent facts. There is a comfort zone emerging among physicians who
specialize in internal medicine and who evaluate industrial injury cases that there is a point at which a
risk factor does become causative of impairment. This is a moving target in any given case and
probably depends upon how long a person has had a risk factor occurring, how many risk factors for a
Page 35 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
given medical condition are occurring at the same time, whether the risk factor is itself a pathology, and
if there is any evidence that risk factors played a role in the person’s family history.
So if an injured worker is claiming cumulative injury to his heart and hypertensive cardiovascular
disease due to 20 years of industrial stress and strain, and if his parents both had heart disease and
hypertension, it is reasonable that a physician could consider a risk factor of family history as partially
causative of impairment due to heart disease and hypertension. The opposite is also true—if there is no
family history of heart disease or hypertension, then there cannot be apportionment to that risk factor
because there is no evidence of the risk factor in the first place.
Can you even say that certain risk factors cause impairment to be worse for an injured worker than if he
or she did not have a risk factor? This is too speculative for any physician to say because there has to
be evidence that a risk factor became causative of impairment.
The additional problem physicians have with the question of apportionment under Labor Code § 4663
and the determination of overlap under Labor Code § 4664 is the legal requirement that the physician
determine what permanent disability “is directly caused” by the industrial injury. Attorneys know the
term, “direct causation” to usually mean “proximate cause” or “but for ‘x’ occurring, ‘y’ would not have
occurred as and when it did.” In other words, “but for the industrial injury, the impairment would not
have occurred how and when it did.”
We know the troubling case of the construction worker who has long standing non-industrial diabetes
who steps on a nail at work and eventually has a below knee amputation due to poor circulation from
the diabetic condition. Is the below knee amputation (a 28% WPI rating, by the way—see AMA Guides,
Table 17-32, page 545) directly caused by the industrial injury or is there apportionment to the
diabetes? There is no consensus between the WCAB panels or the trial judges on how to evaluate
apportionment in this type of case.
There is absolutely no published WCAB en banc decision or any published appellate court decision that
defines what is meant by permanent disability that is “directly caused by the industrial injury.” Direct
causation of permanent disability has never been defined in the context of apportionment under SB
899, nor is it defined in the Escobedo and Gatten cases. So can a risk factor become causative of a
permanent disability? Probably and sometimes. Some physicians have made it abundantly clear that
they would like some guidance from the courts to properly and reasonably assess apportionment using
their skills as scientists and not as speculators. We all look forward to a case that defines “directly
caused.”
[v] The Lindh Decision
In 2018, the District Court of Appeal issued its published decision in City of Petaluma v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (Lindh) [(2018) 29 Cal. App. 5th 1175, 83 Cal. Comp. Cases 1869], which decision
established that a risk factor for an industrial injury can become causative and is subject to
apportionment of permanent disability based on the risk factor itself. Another way to approach the
analysis by the court is to indicate that causation of injury and causation of permanent disability can be
the same when a risk factor becomes causative of an industrial injury.
In Lindh, a police officer sustained injuries to his left eye when he took three to six blows to the left side
of his head while engaging in a canine training course. Afterwards, he had severe headaches lasting
between several hours to one or two days. Over a month later, while off duty, Officer Lindh suddenly
lost most of the vision in his left eye. The QME in the case diagnosed the Applicant with left ischemic
optic neuropathy, left vitreous fibrosis (scar tissue inside the eyeball), and retinal hemorrhages. The left
ischemic optic neuropathy is a condition in which the blood circulation to the nerve of the left eye was
affected, in effect causing a stroke. The Applicant has a vasospastic-type personality, with a long
history of migraines wherein, when he is under emotional stress, he has a higher risk of having the
migraines and the onset of his vascular system going into spasm and losing blood flow to his left eye.
This stress precipitated an acute systemic hypertension and vasospasm that affected his left optic
nerve vessels.
Page 36 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
The QME opined that the cause of his injury was the same as the cause of his permanent disability in
that 85% was due to a non-industrial asymptomatic condition and 15% was due to his getting blows to
the head during the canine training. The trial judge awarded 40% permanent disability and held that
there was no valid, legal apportionment and awarded benefits without apportionment. The City filed a
Petition for Reconsideration, which was denied by a WCAB panel and the Court of Appeal reversed.
The Court of Appeal discussed at length the evolution of apportionment law since the enactment of SB
899 in 2004. The court relied on its own precedent set forth in its prior case ACME Steel v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (Borman) [(2013) 218 Cal. App. 4th 1137, 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 751], where pre-
existing cochlear degeneration was apportioned out of an award for 100% hearing loss due to
cumulative traumatic noise exposure. The court also cited the recent case of City of Jackson v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Rice) [(2017) 11 Cal. App. 5th 109, 82 Cal. Comp. Cases 437], where a
police officer’s heredity or genetics predisposing him to early onset cervical spine degeneration can be
apportioned as partially causative of his permanent disability.
In Lindh, the court held that the Applicant had an underlying non-industrial condition of a vasospastic-
type personality, which put him at a higher risk of suffering a disability, and together with the workplace
injury (getting blows to the head by his dog), were a cause of his loss of vision in his left eye. The court
stated: “More importantly, the post-amendment [SB 899 in 2004] cases do not require medical
evidence that an asymptomatic, preexisting condition, in and of itself, would eventually have become
symptomatic. Rather, what is required is substantial medical evidence that the asymptomatic condition
or pathology was a contributing cause of the disability.”
The court in Lindh nicely summarizes the current state of the law concerning apportionment of
permanent disability to a preexisting non-industrial risk factor: “Thus while a number of cases have
involved asymptomatic preexisting conditions involving a ‘degenerative’ disease, including Jackson
(cervical degenerative condition caused in large part by heredity and genetics), Acme Steel (congenital
degeneration of the cochlea), and E.L. Yeager (Gatton), (degenerative disease of the lumbar spine), no
case has suggested that that particular medical terminology is indicative of a legal requirement for
apportionment. [Citing Jackson]. We perceive no relevant distinction between allowing apportionment
based on a preexisting congenital or pathological condition and allowing apportionment based on a
preexisting degenerative condition caused by heredity or genetics.”
[vi] Duty to Develop Record
Parties and trial judges need to develop the record before a case gets to the appellate level.
How many times have you been confronted with an “ortho, psyche, and internal” case in which either
the psychiatrist or internist, or both, conclude that apportionment of permanent disability follows the
apportionment of the orthopedic surgeon’s conclusions, without any further discussion? Or what if the
physician says the permanent disability is “inextricably intertwined” between separate injuries? Finally,
what happens when an ortho, psyche, and internist do not review each other’s reporting? More often
than not, either conclusion by a QME, AME, or treating physician confounds a trial judge and, as you
will see, the WCAB and Court of Appeal.
Suppose you have a specific injury and a cumulative trauma injury in which an AME in orthopedic
surgery concludes that the injured worker’s lumbar spine permanent disability is caused 75% from a
specific injury and 25% is due to work related injurious exposure from cumulative trauma. Assume that
the orthopedic surgeon properly explains how and why he or she came to that conclusion. For
example, he or she explains that the acute injury led to the spinal surgery and the Applicant’s job duties
were arduous and the medical records reflect the Applicant sought treatment for his lumbar spine prior
to the acute injury. These conclusions would probably constitute substantial medical evidence. It
doesn’t matter whether the apportionment is 75%-25%, 25%–75%, 50%-50%, or any other permutation
of percentages, as long as the orthopedic surgeon’s conclusions are properly explained and supported
by the facts and medical record.
Now suppose the psychologist, psychiatrist, or internist in his or her MMI report states that the
apportionment of permanent disability follows the orthopedic apportionment with no further
Page 37 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
commentary. Does the conclusion by the psychiatrist or internist constitute substantial medical
evidence? Is the conclusion based on reasonable medical probability? What if the psychologist,
psychiatrist, or internist states that apportionment of permanent disability is “inextricably intertwined” so
there is no apportionment between the two injuries and no non-industrial apportionment?
When does a trial judge have a duty to develop the record and how does the trial judge develop the
record in this situation? If the conclusion of the psychiatrist or internist who hitches his or her wagon on
apportionment to the orthopedic surgeon’s conclusion does not constitute substantial evidence, does a
trial judge have a duty to develop the record if the defendant does not meet its burden of proving
apportionment?
At a recent medical-legal seminar, during the question and answer period, a physician asked the
speaker, “How do you define the term reasonable medical probability?” This question symbolizes the
difficulties that physicians have with the law. Physicians are very smart people. They are scientists by
training. To physicians, the law is sometimes like a foreign language no one has ever heard.
The term “probability” to a physician triggers medical school education that defines anything on a scale
of probability under the rules of statistics—that something is true based on a 95% probability with a 5%
probability that the result is due to chance with a confidence interval between one to two standard
deviations from the mean. Virtually every random, double blind, placebo controlled, clinical trial in
medicine utilizes the foregoing standard of measurement. Most, if not all, of you attorneys who have
just read the last two sentences are already lost. You may have heard an indirect reference to this in
the MTUS that describes “weight of evidence” and medical studies that lead to the weight of evidence
of the efficacy of a medical treatment protocol [see Lab. Code §§ 5307.27, 4610.5(c)(2)(A)–(F); 8 Cal.
Code Reg. § 9792.20 (MTUS); 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 9792.8(a)(1)–(4)].
On the other hand, “reasonable medical probability” means that there is at least a 51% probability that
something is true. It is somewhat higher than the “preponderance of evidence” legal standard that
means a feather of weight that is greater than 50% probability of truth or “more probable than not.” So
you can see why case law that applies to apportionment of permanent disability allows a physician to
state what “approximate percentage” of permanent disability is work related and what approximate
percentage is non-industrial to a degree of reasonable medical probability [see Escobedo v. Marshalls
(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc decision); E.L. Yeager Construction v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Gatten) (2006) 145 Cal. App. 4th 922, 52 Cal. Rptr. 3d 133, 71 Cal.
Comp. Cases 1687].
To begin the journey from an orthopedic surgeon’s conclusions about apportionment to those from an
internist or psychiatrist in the same case, you need to review the actual operative language of Labor
Code § 4663. Apportionment of permanent disability under Labor Code § 4664 due to a prior award is a
separate issue, and apportionment under Labor Code § 4664 is a worse nightmare for physicians and
defendants—a subject that deserves some discussion here.
Labor Code § 4663(a) states: “Apportionment of permanent disability shall be based on causation.”
Labor Code § 4663(b) mandates all physicians who address the issue of permanent disability must
make an apportionment determination. Labor Code § 4663(c) mandates that in that determination of
apportionment, the physician shall make a finding as to “what approximate percentage of the
permanent disability was caused by the direct result of injury [AOE/COE] and what approximate
percentage of the permanent disability was caused by other factors both before and subsequent to the
industrial injury, including prior industrial injuries.”
Labor Code § 4664(a) states: “The employer shall only be liable for the percentage of permanent
disability directly caused by the injury [AOE/COE].” Labor Code § 4664(b) mandates that “[i]f the
applicant has received a prior award of permanent disability, it shall be conclusively presumed that the
prior permanent disability exists at the time of any subsequent industrial injury. This presumption is a
presumption affecting the burden of proof.” Labor Code § 4664(c) simply says that no region of the
body can exceed 100% permanent disability over the lifetime of the injured worker.
[vii] Final Apportionment Checklist
Page 38 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
In considering apportionment, a physician should determine apportionment of permanent disability
utilizing the following factors:
• How severe a specific injury was in terms of impact (e.g., did the Applicant fall 3 feet off a chair or
12 feet off a ladder?)
• How arduous was the Applicant’s job as performed?
• Was there a gap in medical treatment to the same part of body from a prior injury (industrial or
non-industrial prior injury)?
• Was there continuous treatment from a prior injury to the same part of body that led up to a more
recent injury?
• Did the Applicant recover from a prior injury to the same part of body?
• What does the diagnostic imaging studies show after a prior injury or from prior medical treatment
for a non-industrial condition to the same part of body?
• What does the chronology of medical events from when there were no signs, symptoms, or
complaints to the present time, reveal, if anything?
[viii] Prior Awards
What if there is a prior award and the Applicant has a new injury? Apportionment of permanent
disability has to be addressed by the treating and evaluating physicians. It becomes problematic for a
physician to assign valid apportionment pursuant to Labor Code § 4664 with a presumption that the
prior permanent disability is, in fact, permanent. Apportionment under Labor Code § 4664 occurs under
two circumstances:
• Prior award is based on the 1997 PDRS or earlier version (based on work restrictions) and new
injury is rated under the AMA Guides 5th Edition
• Prior award is based on a post 1/1/2005 date of injury or otherwise was based on the AMA
Guides 5th Edition and new injury is also under the AMA Guides 5th Edition
We are seeing increased likelihood that more apportionment cases will involve new injuries that have
the same part of body injured that was subject to a prior award under the AMA Guides. How does
apportionment apply in these up-coming cases? If a prior award was based on the 1997 or earlier
PDRS, then you cannot simply subtract a prior permanent disability rating from the current one that is
based on the AMA Guides. This is because it would be like comparing apples to oranges [see, e.g.,
County of Los Angeles v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Barnett) (2010) 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 155 (writ
denied); contra Costa County Fire Protection Dist. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Minvielle) (2010) 75
Cal. Comp. Cases 896 (writ denied)]. Remember, before you can apportion permanent disability, you
must rate permanent disability and adjust for DFEC (or adjustment factor of 1.4 if the date of injury is on
or after 1/1/2013), age, and occupation first. Then you apply apportionment under Labor Code § 4663
or 4664.
For apportionment under Labor Code § 4664 between a prior award that was based on the AMA
Guides and a new injury involving the same part of body, you must take these steps:
• How was prior WPI determined? E.g., DRE vs. ROM for spine?
• How is current WPI determined?
• What were the objective findings for prior rating vs. current one?
• Is there overlap between the prior permanent disability and the current one?
• An Applicant cannot claim he or she recovered from a prior injury that resulted in an Award if
apportionment is established under Labor Code § 4664 prior award.
Page 39 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
• An Applicant can claim he or she recovered from a prior permanent disability if apportionment is
under Labor Code § 4663.
For example, if a knee injury in 2005 rated 5% permanent disability based on a torn medial meniscus
repair and a new 2014 injury involves a torn lateral meniscus repair, there would be no apportionment
under Labor Code § 4664 because the new knee impairment involves a different part of the knee.
However, if the prior award is based on consideration of Almaraz-Guzman III [Milpitas Unified School
Dist. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal.
Comp. Cases 837] in terms of loss of function, the current rating may be reduced by all or part of the
prior rating, depending on overlap. Defendants have the burden of proving overlap between the prior
award and the new rating [see Kopping v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2006) 142 Cal. App. 4th 1099,
48 Cal. Rptr. 3d 618, 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1229].
Defendants have the burden of proving overlap under the Kopping case, which burden has proven to
be elusive, if not impossible. If the prior 2005 knee injury in the example above had been rated based
on the injured worker having an antalgic gait (Table 17-5) and the current rating for a 2014 injury is
based on a total knee replacement (Tables 17-35 and 17-33), then defendant would have a hard time
proving overlap. On the other hand, if the prior 2005 injury award was based on arthritis of the medial,
lateral, or patellofemoral compartment (Table 17-31), and the current rating was based on a total knee
replacement, then there is total overlap and Defendant could make the argument to subtract the prior
award from the current one pursuant to Labor Code § 4664(b).
Otherwise, if Defendant is not able to prove overlap, then the remaining argument regarding
apportionment defaults to an analysis of apportionment under Labor Code § 4663—what percentage of
the current disability is caused by the 2014 injury and what percentage of the current disability is due to
other factors, including the prior award?
What if the prior award in a 2005 lumbar spinal case was based on the DRE method, let’s say DRE
Category II 5% WPI, and the new 2014 injury to the lumbar spine now rates DRE Category III 13%
WPI? Do you automatically subtract the prior award under Labor Code § 4664 apportionment? Again,
Defendant would have to prove overlap. It seems that the analysis of overlap is a medical question as
much as it is a legal concept. If the prior award involved an L4–L5 problem without radiculopathy and
the new injury involves a herniated disc at L5-S1, then there is no overlap. Plus, the DRE III rating is
due to a radiculopathy that did not exist from the prior 2005 injury. If both injuries involved the same
level of the lumbar spine, then you have a fairly good argument of overlap but that must be established
medically by a treating or evaluating physician.
What if the prior award was based on DRE and the new injury is based on ROM? Can there be
overlap? There is no case law on this issue yet, though it is likely to arise soon. It is probable that
counsel would have to focus on the medical diagnosis, the levels of pathology, and the cause of
permanent impairment for each injury to determine if overlap exists.
If the prior award was based on ROM and the new award is based on ROM, then it is possible to prove
overlap with subtraction of permanent disability under Labor Code § 4664(b). In that event, the issue is
whether the ROM measurements are conducted the same way between the earlier MMI evaluation and
the more recent one. Moreover, Table 15-7 will be the final determinate of whether true overlap occurs
because the ROM method relies on a spinal diagnosis that could be totally different between two or
more injuries to the same sub-region of the spine. If there are different spinal diagnosis for each injury
from Table 15-7, then there probably is no overlap, unless Defendant would be able to convince a
physician how overlap can occur when the spinal diagnoses between two or more injuries are different.
What about apportionment to risk factors, such as an extra rib for thoracic outlet syndrome, a
downsloping acromion for shoulder impingement, high cholesterol for heart disease, or the aging
process for osteoporosis [see, e.g., United Airlines v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Milivojevich) (2007)
72 Cal. Comp. Cases 1415 (writ denied) (high cholesterol is only a risk factor for heart disease; it is not
causative of permanent disability); Vaira v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2008) 72 Cal. Comp. Cases
1586 (court of appeal opinion not published in official reports) (73-year-old has fractured vertebral body
Page 40 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
with long lasting osteoporosis; remanded for further development of record to determine how long
person has a disease process dictates potential apportionment, not the person’s age)].
[ix] Practice Points and Take-Aways
Key take-ways for counsel, judges, physicians and others regarding apportionment include the
following:
• Physicians need to separately and thoroughly address apportionment of permanent disability
based on his or her own independent analysis.
• If a physician relies on another physician’s apportionment analysis, he or she must state how and
why he or she agrees with the apportionment, e.g., internal medicine or psychiatric AME or
PQME adopts apportionment based on orthopedic surgeon’s conclusion.
• The parties need to develop the record on causation of injury, causation of permanent disability,
and apportionment when the Applicant is MMI prior to trial.
• Do not sit idly by while the record in a case is deficient on crucial medical-legal issues.
• Judges need to be arbiters of the record—to make sure conclusions of physicians are based on
reasonable medical probability.
• The WCAB panels should not have to develop the record when the parties and the trial judge
already had the best opportunities to do so.
• A WCJ may write a post-trial letter to a physician to develop the record provided that the parties
have an opportunity to object.
• If apportionment between industrial injuries cannot be parceled out, then the physician must state
why they cannot be parceled out.
• Apportionment under Labor Code § 4664 is difficult since defendants have the burden of proving
overlap.
• Apportionment between prior injuries rated under the AMA Guides and new injuries under the
AMA Guides is also difficult under both Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664, which require medical
analysis.
• Most cases will result in apportionment under Labor Code § 4663 if there is more than one
industrial injury to the same part of body using the AMA Guides, especially if alternative rating
methods were used in the prior injury or in the new one.
• An Applicant cannot claim he or she recovered from a prior injury that resulted in an Award if
apportionment is established under a Labor Code § 4664 prior award because of the
conclusive presumption.
• An Applicant can claim he or she recovered from a prior permanent disability if apportionment is
under Labor Code § 4663.
[d] The Brodie Case: Defines Permanent Disability and Apportionment
One theme that counsel will find throughout the case law on permanent disability and apportionment since
the 2004 reforms is the definition of “permanent disability.” In Brodie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
[(2007) 4 Cal. 4th 1313, 57 Cal. Rptr. 3d 644, 72 Cal. Comp. Cases 565 (hereinafter “Brodie”)], the
California Supreme Court for the first time defined the phrase “permanent disability” in the context of the
use of the AMA Guides. The Court stated: “A permanent disability is the irreversible residual of a work-
related injury that causes impairment in earning capacity, impairment in the normal use of a member, or a
handicap in the open labor market. Payments for permanent disability are designed to compensate an
injured employee both for physical loss and reduction in earning capacity.” Also see Contra Costa County v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl) [(2015) 240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119].
Page 41 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
In May 2007, the California Supreme Court resolved the uncertainty generated by conflicting court of
appeal opinions regarding whether the language of Labor Code § 4663(c), plus the language of Labor Code
§ 4664(a), meant that the so-called apportionment “Formula A” adopted by the Supreme Court in Fuentes
[Fuentes v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1976) 16 Cal. 3d 1, 128 Cal. Rptr. 673, 41 Cal. Comp. Cases 42],
pursuant to which the percentage of disability attributable to the new injury is calculated by subtracting the
old permanent disability rating from the new permanent disability rating, then consulting the table for the
award due this difference, remained the proper method for calculating apportionment.
Injured employees had argued that statutory changes made by SB 899 mandated the use of “Formula C,”
rejected by the Supreme Court in Fuentes, pursuant to which the dollar award for the new injury is
calculated as if apportionment were not an issue, then the dollar award of the old injury is subtracted. The
Supreme Court in Brodie found that neither the plain language of relevant portions of SB 899 nor the
legislative history of that bill evidenced any legislative intent to abandon “Formula A” [Brodie v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (2007) 40 Cal. 4th 1313, 57 Cal. Rptr. 3d 644, 72 Cal. Comp. Cases 565; see
Browning-Ferris Industries v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Salter) (2008) 73 Cal. Comp. Cases 211 (court
of appeal unpublished opinion); City of Oakland v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Baptista) (2007) 72 Cal.
Comp. Cases 928 (court of appeal unpublished opinion)].
It had been years since the entire workers’ compensation community had been anxiously awaiting the final
decision in the conflicting courts of appeal cases in Brodie, Welcher and the companion cases from the
California Supreme Court since oral argument occurred in these cases in southern California on April 3,
2007. Under Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664, the debate had raged on which formulas, “A, B, C or modified
C” apply in cases involving legal apportionment and whether the adoption of “Formula A” in Fuentes v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(1976) 16 Cal.3d 1, 128 Cal. Rptr. 673, 41 Cal. Comp. Cases 42] was still
applicable despite the repeal of former Labor Code § 4750. Formula A, established in the Fuentes decision,
had been the law for 30 years by then, since the Supreme Court settled the issue in 1976. The percentage
of apportionment to prior injuries or illnesses that resulted in a permanent disability had to be subtracted
from the overall percentage of permanent disability to determine liability for a current employer.
The legal conclusion as to whether percentages or dollars are subtracted when there is legal apportionment
was thrown into the major debate as one of the first issues under SB 899 that resulted in conflicting courts
of appeal decisions which needed resolution by the Supreme Court for uniformity of decision throughout
California. The following findings were extracted from the detailed opinion by the Supreme Court decision,
some paraphrased and others directly quoted:
• Formula A in Fuentes was originally determined applicable on statutory construction under former
Labor Code § 4750. The philosophy was based upon Section 4750 that the current industrial
portion of the overall disability needs to be considered in isolation, “wholly independent of any
nonindustrial or previous industrial injury.” See Fuentes, 16 Cal. 3d at 5-6.
• The Supreme Court in Brodie reaffirmed the policy that had existed behind former Labor Code § 4750
to encourage employers to hire the handicapped. Remember, the permanent disability payment
schedule went from a linear increase by percentages to a progressive increase by percentages as
of 1972. The notion in adopting Formula A in Fuentes was because an employer who hired an
employee with a prior disability (whether work related or not) would not have to fear greater
compensation costs if that worker with a prior disability were to be injured. See Fuentes at 5.
• Where the legislative intent in enacting a particular statute is clear, the Labor Code § 3202 general
rule of liberal construction will not compel a contrary result. The legislative intent with respect to
how benefits were to be calculated after apportionment was never articulated in SB 899 except to
change the law of apportionment to apply to causation of permanent disability and a conclusive
presumption that a prior permanent disability award is still permanent.
• The Court in Brodie states, “Certainly nothing in current section 4663 and 4664 expressly requires
formula A, B, C, modified C or any other approach to calculating compensation [under section
4658].”
Page 42 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
• The Court answered the following question in the negative: “Did the Legislature intend to adopt a new
and different formula when it adopted new and different language governing apportionment?” Of
course, under prior section 4750, the Legislature never adopted any formula for calculating
benefits after apportionment either, which led to the Fuentes decision. “SB 899 did not indicate the
Legislature intended to overthrow long established principles of law [i.e. using Formula A per
Fuentes] unless such intention is clearly expressed or necessarily implied.”
• The Court compared old apportionment law with the new, and stated with respect to the old law: “In
short, so long as the industrial cause was a but for proximate cause of the permanent disability, the
employer would be liable for the entire disability, without apportionment.”
• The Court goes on to say about rehabilitation from prior disabilities: “The plain language of new
sections 4663 and 4664 demonstrates they were intended to reverse these [full or partial
rehabilitation between a first and second injury resulting in permanent disability] features of former
sections 4663 and 4750.” The Court then cites Kopping v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2006)
142 Cal. App. 4th 1099, 1115, 48 Cal. Rptr. 3d 618, 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1229], and Sanchez v.
Los Angeles County [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 1440, 1452 (Appeals Board en banc)].
• Former Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4750 were inconsistent with the new regime of apportionment based
on causation as well as the conclusive presumption [of section 4664(b)] that previous permanent
disability still existed for apportionment purposes. Former section 4750 allowed trial judges to
disregard a prior permanent disability if applicant proved rehabilitation that is “squarely at odds”
with new section 4664(b). Repeal of section 4750 was necessary to adopt an apportionment by
causation regime.
• The legislative history for SB 899 is silent on a possible change from Formula A to any other formula.
• Citing the legislative history of SB 899, the Court seems to agree that there is a perceived crisis in
“skyrocketing workers’ compensation costs.”
• There was no intent to raise workers’ compensation benefits other than those mentioned in SB 899,
such as raising from 6 weeks to 16 weeks of payments of permanent disability for each percentage
of permanent disability over 70%.
• The Supreme Court chose Formula A and, in Footnote 14 of its opinion, indicates that Formula A
creates equality from an employer-based perspective whereas Formula C creates equality from an
employee-based perspective.
• The Supreme Court gives deference to the WCAB’s holding in Nabors I [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases
856 (Appeals Board en banc)] that incorporated Formula A because the Legislature did not intend
to get rid of it. The Legislature did not intend to amend settled law and alter the status quo
concerning the appropriate formula.
• “The tables in section 4658 are for compensating the current injury only, not the totality of an injured
worker’s disabilities.”
Although the Supreme Court decision disappointed applicant attorneys and labor advocates, the decision to
adopt Formula A was a foregone conclusion and is not unexpected from an academic standpoint. The
Legislature did not expressly reverse Fuentes in SB 899 by adopting a different method of calculating
permanent disability after apportionment even though it could have. Reduced permanent disability awards
in certain cases, along with medical control, have been on the business and insurance communities’ wish
list for years. The political climate for change was not in the direction of increasing benefits to injured
workers who had a prior award or previous injury or illness that resulted in permanent disability. The
struggle to adopt a new formula in this political environment was noble but poorly timed. The absence of
legislative intent to change the method of calculating permanent disability after apportionment set the stage
for the Court to rely on the doctrine of stare decisis from 30 years of the application of Fuentes without any
compelling reason to change it. Going from what has been a less restrictive apportionment “regime” to a
more restrictive one based upon causation of permanent disability with reductions in awards for pathology,
asymptomatic conditions, prior awards and retroactive prophylactic restrictions is anathema to the idea that
Page 43 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
Fuentes should be reversed simply on the basis that the statute it was based on was repealed under SB
899. That being said, there is virtually no evidence supporting the Court’s assertion that the public policy in
favor of hiring the handicapped is the main reason for adopting Formula A thereby saving employers liability
and money for new injuries. The Court’s reliance on this notion is not based on any empirical data in 1977
or 30 years later in 2007. This was a political fiction that is not based on any actual studies, research or
evidence based facts presented to the Supreme Court leading up to both Fuentes in 1977 and Brodie in
2007.
This is especially true in light of current privacy and anti-discrimination laws that prohibit disclosure of
protected health information, the existence of a disability or handicap and whether a prospective employee
must disclose if he or she has ever filed a workers’ compensation claim or suffered a work-related injury as
part of an employment application. The protections under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Family
Medical Leave Act (29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.), and California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act
(Government Code § 12900 et seq.) did not exist in 1977 when Fuentes was decided by the Supreme Court
and those protections are probably more effective in promoting the public policy of hiring the handicapped
than the use of Formula A in workers’ compensation cases.
The fact that the Court rejected the notion that Formula C (dollars minus dollars) should apply in cases
where subsequent industrial injuries occurred while the employee was employed by the same employer is
troubling since the logic propounded by the trial judge in Dykes [see E & J Gallo Winery v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (Dykes) (2005) 134 Cal. App. 4th 1536, 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 1644] made legal and moral
sense. Since successive permanent disabilities to the same parts of body result in progressive amounts of
permanent disability indemnity, an employee’s ability to compete in the open labor market was greatly
affected. If the employee is working for the same employer with successive injuries, there is no issue
involving the public policy in favor of hiring the handicapped to “protect” the employer from being liable for a
“progressive” permanent disability. A successively injured worker with the same employer should enjoy the
progressive permanent disability payment schedule since the “hire the handicapped” public policy would not
apply in those situations.
However, perhaps the Court did not want to invite litigation over equal protection for cases involving the
same progressive disabilities but with injuries with separate employers or claims administrators.
The Court’s discussion about rehabilitation from a prior disability is also troubling. It is clear in the “regime”
of the new apportionment law that the Legislature intended to require prior awards of permanent disability
to be subtracted from current ones involving the same parts of body pursuant to new Labor Code § 4664(b).
However, as dicta, the Court seems to hint that injured employees may have a difficult, if not impossible,
burden of proving rehabilitation from a prior injury that did not result in an award or any prior nonindustrial
injury or condition. The Court has cast some doubt about whether rehabilitation can be claimed under
apportionment under new Section 4663 by saying that the Legislature intended to reverse partial or total
rehabilitation features of former sections 4663 and 4750.
The Court then anachronistically cites Sanchez v. Los Angeles County [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 1440,
1452 (Appeals Board en banc)] that held an employee can prove a form of rehabilitation—that a current
permanent disability is caused by a different factor than that which caused a prior disability to the same
body part. It is no wonder why the Supreme Court itself said they like to give great deference to the WCAB
because of the WCAB’s expertise in workers’ compensation matters. So now that the Court has spoken,
indirectly, on the issue of rehabilitation from a prior disability, can we still claim that an employee has totally
or partially recovered from a prior disability that did or did not result in an award?
The dicta in Brodie implies the answer is no, but in citing the Samchez and Kopping cases, the Court
seems to defer to the WCAB on that issue in which the facts are similar to those that occurred in Sanchez
or Kopping where the employee’s current disability was independent from the prior one even though both
disabilities involve the same part of body, for example, in the Sanchez case, the lower extremity. Perhaps
from an applicant’s attorney standpoint, the conclusive presumption in Section 4664 is not always
conclusive after all.
We also have the burning question about whether the Court’s decision in Brodie affects established law for
successive injuries under Wilkinson [Wilkinson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1977) 19 Cal. 3d 491, 42
Page 44 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
Cal. Comp. Cases 406]. Remember, Wilkinson also involved successive injuries and was decided after
Fuentes by the same Supreme Court in 1977. The Court in Wilkinson cited Fuentes extensively by saying
that the decision in Fuentes adopting Formula A does not overrule the “Bauer Doctrine” in the WCAB en
banc decision in Bauer v. County of Los Angeles [(1969) 34 Cal. Comp. Cases 594 (Appeals Board en
banc)].
The “Bauer Doctrine” established the rule that if an employer suffers successive industrial injuries and
becomes permanent and stationary at the same time for all injuries, then there is one overall permanent
disability rating rather than separate ones for each industrial injury. This doctrine became even more
important after 1972 when the permanent disability payment schedule went from linear increases to
progressive increases for permanent disabilities in higher percentage ratings.
The Court in Brodie is silent on the issue of how successive industrial injuries that become permanent and
stationary at the same time are to be rated. The Court in Wilkinson simply stated that its decision in
Fuentes did not overrule the Bauer Doctrine so there can be one overall rating for successive injuries that
become permanent and stationary at the same time if the injuries involve the same employer and the same
parts of body. We will probably see more litigation on this issue alone in cases involving the AMA Guides
and the 2005 permanent disability rating schedule where the concept of separate body regions is applicable
for rating purposes and apportionment under Section 4664(c).
Using the same logic the Court used in Brodie, it is fair to say that the Wilkinson decision remains the law
until the Supreme Court says otherwise, because there is nothing in SB 899 or in the legislative history of
SB 899 that indicates the intent of the legislature to overrule Wilkinson. So what are the practical effects of
the Court’s decision in Brodie on our law practices? It is obvious that in the current political climate in
workers’ compensation law, the Court has saved employers and their claims administrators millions, if not
billions, of dollars by, in effect, avoiding life pension cases in successive injury cases where the employee
is permanent and stationary at different times, either from prior industrial or nonindustrial injuries.
Individuals with successive serious permanent disabilities will have to rely on public assistance programs,
social security disability and other means besides the private welfare program of workers’ compensation.
Does the Court’s decision violate the “compensation bargain?” This is a political question left to the
politicians and with the Court essentially applying stare decisis in upholding the use of Formula A, there is
no doubt that the compensation bargain remains the same, albeit in a weakened state.
Much of this issue will fade into the twilight and more significant battles will be fought in litigation over how
the Court’s decision affects cases where a prior industrial injury is rated under the 1997 permanent
disability rating schedule (1997 PDRS) and new injuries are rated under the AMA Guides and the 2005
PDRS involving the same body parts. You cannot subtract percentages based upon work restrictions under
the 1997 PDRS from impairment and permanent disability ratings based upon the AMA Guides and the
2005 PDRS. This is because the 1997 PDRS is based upon reduced ability to compete in the open labor
market while the 2005 PDRS is based upon impairments under the AMA Guides adjusted by a diminished
future earning capacity.
A “no heavy work restriction” for a 39-year old nurse with a lumbar spine injury under the 1997 PDRS rates
30% permanent disability. The same nurse in a post 1/1/05 lumbar spine injury case would be rated using
Chapter 15 of the AMA Guides, The Spine, and her rating under the 2005 PDRS would probably be less
than 30% permanent disability. If you use the subtraction of percentages Formula A method mandated
under Brodie, the result would be inequitable and in some cases result in a negative percentage rating. This
would be like subtracting apples from oranges, and Formula A cannot apply in “cross-over” cases involving
a prior award under the 1997 or earlier permanent disability rating schedules and the 2005 PDRS.
By example, a hypothetical case arises where there are successive injuries to a lumbar spine for the 39-
year old nurse who suffers a specific lumbar spine injury in 1997 resulting in a 30% award. She returns to
work in 1998, has a second specific injury to her lumbar spine in 2004, returns to work in 2004 and has a
continuous trauma injury to her lumbar spine from the beginning of her employment in 1990 through 2017.
How would her permanent disability be evaluated, assuming liability for all injuries have been accepted?
Under the Brodie decision, the prior award under the 1997 PDRS is 30% and would be presumed to exist at
the time of the new injuries pursuant to Labor Code § 4664(b). Since the employee returned to work after
Page 45 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
her 2004 specific injury and before 1/1/05, the 1997 PDRS would apply for that case if the employee’s
lumbar condition became permanent and stationary prior to 1/1/05. For the continuous trauma injury
through 2017, the AMA Guides would apply.
If the employee’s lumbar spine condition became permanent and stationary after each separate injury
occurred, then there would be three separate ratings of permanent disability, the 1997 and 2004 specific
injuries under the 1997 PDRS and the 2017 injury rated under the 2005 PDRS. The permanent disability
from the prior 1997 specific injury (30%) would be subtracted from the percentage of permanent disability
based on the 1997 PDRS for the 2004 injury for the rating for the 2004 specific injury. This would be
consistent with applying Formula A, now affirmed by the Supreme Court in Brodie, which will now apply in
all pending cases.
The employee would argue that she could present evidence under the Sanchez case that her prior award of
30% for the 1997 specific injury was due to a lumbar spinal condition that is different from the lumbar spinal
condition that is a result of the 2004 injury and continuous trauma injury and that the percentage of
permanent disability from the prior award should not be subtracted from the 2004 rating from the 1997
PDRS because she was able to rebut the presumption that the prior 30% award should be subtracted from
the award for the 2004 specific injury.
The evaluating or treating physician would then have to indicate the impairment rating for the continuous
trauma injury of 2017 under the AMA Guides and he or she would have to apply apportionment under
Labor Code § 4663 to indicate approximately what percentage of the employee’s overall permanent
disability to her lumbar spine is directly the result of continuous trauma and what percentage of her
permanent disability is caused by the prior two specific industrial injuries and any other nonindustrial
factors. It is impossible for a judge or the parties to be able to use Formula A to take the 2005 PDRS rating
for the 2017 continuous trauma injury and subtract the prior 30% award from that rating applying Labor
Code § 4664 because ratings under the 1997 PDRS cannot be subtracted from ratings under the 2005
PDRS since that would be unreasonable to subtract a permanent disability rating based upon work
restrictions from one that is based on whole person impairment ratings.
The issue of how to calculate permanent disability payments with prior awards or prior injuries will require
application of Formula A only in cases where the same permanent disability rating schedule is used for all
injuries. Otherwise, an inequitable result will occur. But what happens if the nurse’s lumbar spine condition
as a result of her 2004 specific injury and 2017 continuous trauma injury became permanent and stationary
at the same time? Under Wilkinson, how do you calculate her permanent disability and how does Formula
A apply?
The treating or evaluating physician would first have to indicate what the overall permanent impairment
rating is for the nurse’s lumbar spine condition. The physician would have to indicate in his or her
apportionment discussion approximately what percentage of the permanent impairment to the lumbar spine
is due to the continuous trauma injury, and to the specific injury of 2004, and how much of the impairment is
due to the prior 1997 specific injury and any other factor. Labor Code § 4664(b) and the use of Formula A
could not be used in this case at all since the prior award was for permanent disability under the 1997
PDRS and the current permanent disability is based on the 2005 PDRS. The award in this case would be
determined by taking the overall permanent disability rating percentage from the 2005 PDRS and
subtracting from it the percentage of apportionment for the prior industrial injury and any “other factor” that
is causing permanent disability.
So Formula A from Brodie will not apply in cross-over cases and its application will only occur when a prior
award is based upon the same PDRS as the current injury. Even if the prior 1997 lumbar spine injury was
nonindustrial, then Formula A would apply only to the extent of the judge subtracting from the overall
percentage of permanent disability under the 2005 PDRS the percentage of impairment caused by “other
factors” including any prior industrial or nonindustrial injuries to the same part of body.
In conclusion, the Court cites in footnote 10 of its opinion the principle of Occam’s razor—that the simplest
of competing theories should be preferred over more complex and subtle ones—applies judicially as well as
scientifically. The citation by the Court is ironic since this is a case in which the Court has saved millions of
dollars for the employer/claims administrator community by adopting Formula A under SB 899 in a new
Page 46 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
workers’ compensation system that seems to sharply cut, with a razor’s edge, injured workers’ benefits for
permanent disability. The Court accomplished this by two swipes of the “razor”—adopting Formula A
instead of Formula C and by implying in its dicta that rehabilitation from a prior injury that resulted in a
disability may no longer be legally possible.
[e] Select Cases on Apportionment
ACME STEEL v. WORKERS’ COMP. APPEALS BD. (BORMAN)
An employee sustained a hearing loss in the form of cumulative trauma AOE/COE. The AME apportioned
the hearing loss based on both non-industrial, degenerative causes and prior injury, opining that the
employee’s 100 percent hearing loss was 60 percent due to occupational factors, specifically noise-induced
hearing loss, and 40 percent due to non-occupational factors, particularly cochlear degeneration. The AME
reported that the employee told him that he filed a workers’ compensation claim following a 1994 factory
explosion, which resulted in a rating of 22 percent disability due to hearing loss. The WCJ in the current
proceedings found that the employee showed 100 percent loss of earning capacity, entitling him to PTD,
based on the employee’s expert vocational testimony. The court of appeal, however, noted that employers
are required to compensate injured workers for only that portion of PD attributable to the current industrial
injury, not for that portion attributable to previous injuries or to nonindustrial factors. The Appeals Board,
stated the court, ignored the unrebutted substantial medical evidence presented by the AME showing that
the employee’s 100 percent loss of hearing could not be attributed solely to the current cumulative trauma,
and the Board should have parceled out the causative sources (nonindustrial, prior industrial, current
industrial) and decided the amount directly caused by the current industrial source [Acme Steel v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (Borman) (2013) 218 Cal. App. 4th 1137, 1142–1144, 160 Cal. Rptr. 3d 712, 78 Cal.
Comp. Cases 751].
CITY OF PETALUMA v. WORKERS’ COMP. APPEALS BD. (LINDH)
City of Petaluma v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Lindh)
As discussed above, in 2018, the District Court of Appeal issued its published decision in  City of Petaluma
v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Lindh) [(2018) 29 Cal. App. 5th 1175, 83 Cal. Comp. Cases 1869], which
decision established that a risk factor for an industrial injury can become causative and is subject to
apportionment of permanent disability based on the risk factor itself. Another way to approach the analysis
by the court is to indicate that causation of injury and causation of permanent disability can be the same
when a risk factor becomes causative of an industrial injury,
In Lindh, a police officer sustained injuries to his left eye when he took three to six blows to the left side of
his head while engaging in a canine training course. Afterwards he had severe headaches lasting between
several hours to one or two days. Over a month later while off duty, Officer Lindh suddenly lost most of the
vision in his left eye. The QME in the case diagnosed the Applicant with left ischemic optic neuropathy, left
vitreous fibrosis (scar tissue inside the eyeball), and retinal hemorrhages. The left ischemic optic
neuropathy is a condition in which the blood circulation to the nerve of the left eye was affected, in effect
causing a stroke. The Applicant has a vasospastic-type personality with a long history of migraines wherein
when he is under emotional stress he has a higher risk of having the migraines and the onset of his
vascular system going into spasm and losing blood flow to his left eye. This stress precipitated an acute
systemic hypertension and vasospasm that affected his left optic nerve vessels.
The QME opined that the cause of his injury was the same as the cause of his permanent disability in that
85% was due to a non-industrial asymptomatic condition and 15% was due to his getting blows to the head
during the canine training. The trial judge awarded 40% permanent disability and held that there was no
valid, legal apportionment and awarded benefits without apportionment. The City filed a Petition for
Reconsideration, which was denied by a WCAB panel, and the District Court of Appeal reversed.
The Court of Appeal discussed at length the evolution of apportionment law since the enactment of SB 899
in 2004. The court relied on its own precedent set forth in its prior case  ACME Steel v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (Borman) [(2013) 218 Cal. App. 4th 1137, 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 751] where pre-existing
cochlear degeneration was apportioned out of an award for 100% hearing loss due to cumulative traumatic
Page 47 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
noise exposure. The court also cited the case of  City of Jackson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Rice)
[(2017) 11 Cal. App. 5th 109, 82 Cal. Comp. Cases 437] where a police officer’s heredity or genetics
predisposing him to early onset cervical spine degeneration can be apportioned as partially causative of his
permanent disability. Borman is an important case for counsel to read and to understand since it formed the
basis for the Court of Appeal’s decision in Lindh. The Applicant in Borman suffered from a non-industrial
hearing loss due to cochlear degeneration. His total hearing loss was caused by industrially related noise
exposures on a cumulative trauma basis. The AME apportioned 40% of the permanent disability to the non-
industrial condition and indicated the Applicant had a congenital degeneration of his cochlea which caused
permanent hearing loss as well as was caused by industrial noise exposure. The AME was able to parcel
out permanent disability due to the preexisting pathology and industrial causation of the hearing loss. This
is a good case to read in order to understand the medical analysis that occurs where causation of injury is a
separate issue from causation of permanent disability discussed in Escobedo.
In Lindh, the court held that the Applicant has an underlying non-industrial condition of a vasospastic-type
personality which put him at a higher risk of suffering a disability and together with the workplace injury
(getting blows to the head by his dog) were a cause of his loss of vision in his left eye. The court stated:
“More importantly, the post-amendment [SB 899 in 2004] cases do not require medical evidence that an
asymptomatic, preexisting condition, in and of itself, would eventually have become symptomatic. Rather,
what is required is substantial medical evidence that the asymptomatic condition or pathology was a
contributing cause of the disability.”
The court in Lindh nicely summarizes the current state of the law concerning apportionment of permanent
disability to a preexisting non-industrial risk factor: “Thus while a number of cases have involved
asymptomatic preexisting conditions involving a ‘degenerative’ disease, including Jackson (cervical
degenerative condition caused in large part by heredity and genetics), Acme Steel (congenital degeneration
of the cochlea), and E.L. Yeager (Gatton) (degenerative disease of the lumbar spine), no case has
suggested that that particular medical terminology is indicative of a legal requirement for apportionment.”
[Citing Jackson]. “We perceive no relevant distinction between allowing apportionment based on a
preexisting congenital or pathological condition and allowing apportionment based on a preexisting
degenerative condition caused by heredity or genetics.”
Note: Labor Code § 3212.2 has an anti-attribution clause which provides that the medical conditions
included within the presumption “shall in no case be attributed to any disease existing prior to such
development or manifestation.” Thus, for low back injury sustained by a peace officer employed by the
University of California who was required to wear a duty belt covered under the presumption statute of
Labor Code § 3213.2, apportionment for the low back disability is legally permissible. The Legislature
intended to change existing law by amendment to Labor Code § 4663 by adding subdivision (e) in 2006
which states: “Subdivisions (a), (b), and (c) shall not apply to injuries or illnesses covered under Sections
3212, 3212.1, 3212.2, 3212.3, 3212.4, 3212.5, 3212.6, 3212.7, 3212.8, 3212.85, 3212.9, 3212.10, 3212.11,
3212.12, 3213, 3213.2.” Many attorneys who represent covered safety members such as police officers
and sheriff’s deputies nicknamed Labor Code § 4663(e) as the “anti-Benson” statute or the “anti-attribution
clause” of the apportionment statute.
Cases have emerged since Labor Code § 4663(e) was enacted that include:
• Delia v. County of Los Angeles/Sheriff’s Department [2010 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 282(Appeals
Board noteworthy panel decision) (anti-attribution clause for injuries covered under Labor Code
§ 3212 through Labor Code § 3212.3 precluding apportionment under Labor Code § 4663(e)
illustrates how percentages of permanent disability from prior or subsequent injury contributing to
overall permanent disability cannot be parceled out)]
• Department of Corrections & Rehabilitation v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Alexander) [(2008) 166
Cal. App. 4th 911, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 920, 73 Cal. Comp. Cases 1294 (SB 899 as enacted in 2004
did not repeal anti-attribution doctrine for injuries subject to presumptions under Labor Code
§ 3212 through § 3213.2)]
• City of Irvine v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Giannini) [(2013) 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 157, 158(writ
denied) (lumbar spinal condition not subject to apportionment to prior award)]
Page 48 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
CITY OF JACKSON v. WORKERS’ COMP. APPEALS BD. (RICE)
Apportionment may be properly based on genetics/hereditability. Following surgery on applicant’s
cumulative trauma injury AOE/COE to his cervical spine, a QME opined that applicant’s pain was caused,
17 percent each, by his employment, by his previous employment, and by his personal activities, and 49
percent by his personal history, “including genetic issues.” Escobedo v. Marshalls [(2005) 70 Cal. Comp.
Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc)] held that SB 899 permitted apportionment based on “the natural
progression of a non-industrial condition or disease, a preexisting disability, or a post-injury disabling event,
… pathology, asymptomatic prior conditions, and retroactive prophylactic work preclusions.” Precluding
apportionment based on “impermissible immutable factors,” as argued by the employer in the present case,
would preclude apportionment based on “the very factors that the legislation now permits, i.e.,
apportionment based on pathology and asymptomatic prior conditions for which the worker has an inherited
predisposition.” The court of appeal saw “no relevant distinction between allowing apportionment based on
a preexisting congenital or pathological condition and allowing apportionment based on a preexisting
degenerative condition caused by heredity or genetics” [City of Jackson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(Rice) (2017) 11 Cal. App. 5th 109, 115–122, 216 Cal. Rptr. 3d 911, 82 Cal. Comp. Cases 437].
In the Rice case, the Applicant was a police officer who had a cervical fusion surgery while in his 30s. It is
clear that the officer had early onset degenerative disc disease in his cervical spine and his work as a
police officer contributed to the need for the fusion surgery at such an early age. However, there was no
clear-cut evidence that anyone in his family had a history of early onset spinal degenerative phenomenon.
Nevertheless, the DCA accepted the evaluating physician’s reliance on medical literature that supported
her conclusion that the officer’s degenerative disc disease in his neck was genetically based and not
primarily work related. The problem with this case that there is an equal number of studies in the medical
literature that supports an opposite conclusion and the evaluating physician cherry-picked the studies she
cited in her report. The practical point is to be leery of medical conclusions that are based on hereditary
factors because there are very few illnesses, diseases, or degenerative processes that have a confirmed
genetic link.
HIKIDA v. WORKERS’ COMP. APPEALS BD.
In Hikida v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2017) 12 Cal. App. 5th 1249, 82 Cal. Comp. Cases 679], the
Applicant sustained cumulative traumatic injuries to her hands and wrists and other parts of body. When
her wrist was operated on for a carpal tunnel release, she developed a severe case of complex regional
pain syndrome (CRPS). The AME evaluating physician opined that the Applicant was 100% permanently
and totally disabled, but 10% of her disability was due to non-industrial factors that contributed to her carpal
tunnel syndrome. The AME also opined that her permanent total disability was entirely due to the effects of
the CRPS that she developed as a result of the failed wrist surgery.
After a somewhat torturous journey to the WCAB, back to the trial level, back up to the WCAB, and then to
the Court of Appeal, the published Court of Appeal decision was issued.
We have seen many cases where there are multiple injuries to the same part of body where eventually the
Applicant has surgery to that body part and a poor result from surgery occurs. We have all seen our share
of chronic pain syndrome cases that arise out of a failed lumbar spinal surgery. The Hikida case has to be
understood in context. Her original injuries were to her upper extremities. The surgical procedure resulted in
the development of Complex Regional Pain Syndrome.
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) is a central nervous system disorder and is no longer an upper
or lower extremity condition even though the original injuries were to the upper extremities in this case. The
District Court of Appeal’s analysis is spot on from a medical standpoint since the Applicant’s disability is
caused by the CRPS and not by the underlying median nerve injuries to her wrists. Once she developed
the CRPS from the carpal tunnel surgery, her disability was no longer stemming from an upper extremity
disorder—she has a completely different body system, i.e., the central nervous system, which is directly
causing her permanent total disability.
The Court of Appeal defined the issue in this case as to whether an employer is responsible for both the
medical treatment and disability arising directly from unsuccessful medical intervention, without
Page 49 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
apportionment. In these cases, the key element is that the resulting permanent disability has to arise
directly from the unsuccessful medical treatment. The court’s conclusion is an extension of the well-
established law that since an employer is liable for medical treatment to cure and relieve the effects of an
industrial injury, an employer is also liable for the foreseeable consequences of such medical treatment,
without apportionment. Here, the Applicant’s permanent total disability was caused by the CRPS, which
was a compensable consequence of the carpal tunnel surgery.
From a defense perspective, it can be said that the DCA decision is limited to cases in which a new
diagnosis occurs after unsuccessful treatment for an underlying injury. For this reason, it remains to be
seen whether there will be wide application of Hikida in future cases. Also, the court in Hikida did not
address a different but recurring problem in cases where there is more than one injury to the same part of
body resulting in surgery that causes significant impairment and disability that arises from the unsuccessful
surgery. Does the court’s decision in Hikida override the mandate to determine apportionment of permanent
disability “for each injury” in accordance with Benson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2009) 170 Cal. App.
4th 1535, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113]?
A general rule of thumb to use to see if the principles in Hikida apply is to (1) determine if there is an
iatrogenic medical condition that arose from medical intervention for an accepted body part, and (2) if that
iatrogenic condition is causing permanent disability separate and apart from the underlying medical
condition that was directly caused by an industrial injury, then Hikida probably applies and an un-
apportioned permanent disability is possible. This is true even if the underlying industrially related condition
was caused by more than one industrial injury or there were more than one contributing factor that caused
the original injury, such as in Hikida involving carpal tunnel syndrome caused 90% by her work activities
and 10% from non-industrial causes.
Recent cases apply the concepts in Hikida:
• Mills v. American Medical Response [2019 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 84(Appeals Board
noteworthy panel decision) (three injuries, six AMEs, spinal stimulator that failed and caused
additional medical complications resulting in WCJ and WCAB finding 100% permanent total
disability (PTD) with no apportionment)]
• Estrada v. Edge Sales and Marketing [2018 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 451(Appeals Board
noteworthy panel decision) (WCJ and WCAB found 100% PTD from severe deep vein thrombosis
as a result of two-level spinal fusion surgery)]
• Jordan v. CA Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation [2018 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS
243(Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision) (Applicant had two injuries that resulted in 162%
permanent disability, reduced by WCAB panel to 60% PD for one injury and 100% for another with
no violation of Labor Code § 4663(c) where one region of the body cannot exceed 100%
permanent disability)]
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA V. WORKERS’ COMP. APPEALS BD. (JUSTICE)
County of Santa Clara v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Justice) [(2020) 49 Cal. App. 5th 605, 262 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 876, 85 Cal. Comp. Cases 467] is important for counsel to read in order to distinguish factual and
medical contrast between this case and Hikida. In Justice, the Applicant was a claims examiner who fell at
work, injuring her left knee on November 22, 2011. Eventually her right knee developed pain and problems
as a compensable consequence of her left knee injury from the fall at work. In 2012 and 2013, Ms. Justice
had total knee replacement surgery to each knee, one year apart. Diagnostic studies confirmed that Ms.
Justice had significant pre-existing degenerative osteoarthritis. An agreed medical examiner, Dr. Anderson
made the following observation in his deposition: that an X-ray of her knees, taken on November 28, 2011,
showed “marked osteoarthritis” of the knees. An MRI conducted on January 18, 2012, showed that the
Applicant had suffered a medial and lateral meniscal tear as a result of the fall at work. The MRI also
revealed significant preexisting degeneration, all of which predated the fall at work: an “old” tear of the
anterior cruciate ligament, “marked loss of articular cartilage in the medial compartment,” “moderate loss of
articular cartilage in the lateral compartment,” and “moderate loss in the patellofemoral joint.” There was
Page 50 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
also scar tissue on both knees indicating that the Applicant had undergone a “significant open procedure” at
some point in the past.
The AME opined that the Applicant’s permanent disability was 50% due to the fall at work and the
compensable consequences thereof and 50% to pre-existing non-industrial degenerative osteoarthritis of
both knees. The trial judge awarded a permanent disability award with no apportionment, opining that the
bilateral knee surgeries caused her permanent disability, properly rated under Tables 17-35 and 17-33 of
the AMA Guides and applied the concept in Hikida. The Appeals Board upheld the trial judge’s decision and
the Court of Appeal reversed.
Here is what the Court of Appeal said concerning apportionment in cases like this one where there is clear
evidence of pre-existing pathology:
In contrast to Hikida, the permanent disability in this case was not caused entirely by the industrial
medical treatment. The medical treatment did not result in a new, unexpected compensable
consequential injury. Rather, the surgery was “quite successful,” and it “significantly increase[d]”
Justice’s “ability to walk and engage in weight-bearing activities.” Based on a careful review of Justice’s
medical history, Dr. Anderson found that the permanent disability was caused 50 percent by industrial
factors and 50 percent by nonindustrial factors. Sections 4663 and 4664 plainly require that the
permanent disability be apportioned among industrial and nonindustrial factors if unrebutted substantial
medical evidence supports an apportionment finding. Here, Dr. Anderson's findings constitute
unrebutted substantial medical evidence. It was error for the workers' compensation judge and the
Board to ignore unrebutted substantial medical evidence that nonindustrial factors, in part, caused
Justice’s permanent disability.
Respondent Justice argues that notwithstanding Hikida, the award with no apportionment was correct
under the law. She contends that she had worked for 20 years without any discussion of a need for
total knee replacement, that the fall at work was the “precipitating event” leading to the need for total
knee replacement surgery, and that therefore the total knee replacement was “directly caused by the
work injury.” Because the total knee replacement provided the sole basis for the disability rating,
Justice contends that it was appropriate to conclude that there should be no apportionment. According
to her, “neither knee surgeries [sic] would have occurred if [she] had not fallen” at work.
Justice’s arguments are misplaced. “Whether or not an asymptomatic preexisting condition that
contributed to the disability would, alone, have inevitably become manifest and resulted in disability, is
immaterial.” (Petaluma, supra, 29 Cal.App.5th at p. 1193.) Although she is correct that an employer is
responsible for the portion of the permanent disability “directly caused” by industrial factors, implicit in
this inquiry is a determination of whether other nonindustrial factors also indirectly caused the
permanent disability. In this case, Dr. Anderson concluded that Justice had significant nonindustrial
preexisting knee degeneration, which caused 50 percent of the postsurgical permanent disability.
Whether or not the workplace injury “directly caused” the need for surgery, the apportionment statutes
nevertheless demand that the disability be sorted among direct and indirect causal factors. In this case,
there was unrebutted substantial medical evidence that Justice’s permanent disability was caused, in
part, by an extensive preexisting knee pathology. Apportionment was therefore required.
Counsel is advised to evaluate the objective medical findings that may have existed prior to a specific
industrial injury in order to justify apportionment of permanent disability. This case should be contrasted
with the similar facts that occurred to Ms. Escobedo when she fell while working at Marshall’s, injuring her
knees with pre-existing degenerative osteoarthritis. In the Justice case, the court clearly applied the long-
standing evaluation of potential apportionment of permanent disability as a result of pre-existing
pathologies. The court in Justice relied heavily on the subsequent case law after Escobedo, including City
of Petaluma v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Lindh) and Borman cases discussed above in this guidebook.
In Justice, the Applicant’s pre-existing bilateral knee osteoarthritis was a significant cause of her permanent
disability following her bilateral total knee replacement surgeries.
NADY v. PLEASANT VALLEY STATE PRISON
Page 51 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
One case reminds counsel of a basic requirement of the law when an injured worker retains an attorney.
Pursuant to Labor Code § 4663(d), an employee who is claiming a work related injury has a mandatory duty
to disclose the existence of all previous permanent disabilities or impairments upon the request of the
employer or its claims administrator. Usually this request is made on behalf of an employer once a claims
administrator has knowledge of an employee’s claim of injury. This may occur before or after the employee
retains counsel. In fact, the Application for Adjudication of Claim form has a provision for the injured
employee to disclose prior awards, settlements, or other permanent disabilities or impairments. This is an
employer’s right to basic discovery, even before an Application is filed with the WCAB. Once an Application
for Adjudication is filed with the WCAB District Office, jurisdiction over the claim is conferred. If an injured
employee fails to disclose the existence of prior awards or impairments, the defendant may file a Motion to
Compel the Applicant to comply with Section 4663(d). The scope of disclosure is probably limited to
permanent disabilities or impairments to the parts of body claimed in the current case, but that issue has
not been determined by the WCAB since medical privacy issues may arise if the disclosure requirement
applies to any disabilities or impairments and not just ones that may impact a permanent disability that is
claimed to specific parts of body [see Nady v. Pleasant Valley State Prison, 2017 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D.
LEXIS 446 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)].
MORRIS v. WORKERS’ COMP. APPEALS BD.
The Appeals Board affirmed the WCJ’s award of permanent disability to a worker, apportioned 90 percent
to a 9/10/2004 injury to her head, neck, low back, psyche, colon, and in the form of hypertension, 23
percent to a cumulative injury to her low back, neck, and in the form of hypertension through 11/2/2004,
and six percent to a 5/11/2004 back injury, and held that, contrary to her assertion, the worker was not
entitled to an award of 100 percent permanent disability for the 9/10/2004 injury alone, without
apportionment, “in accordance with the fact” pursuant to Labor Code § 4662, based on medical evidence
showing total loss of earning capacity. The Board found that medical evidence alone indicating that the
worker was unable to compete in the open labor market, without reports or testimony from a vocational
expert, could not rebut the scheduled permanent disability rating as described in Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd., because “[i]t is improper for a doctor to deem an applicant 100 percent permanently disabled
based on the doctor’s opinion that the applicant is unable to compete on the open labor market.” The AMEs
in orthopedics, neurology, and psychiatry, while finding that the worker was permanently totally disabled,
apportioned the worker’s permanent disability among her three injuries and to preexisting nonindustrial
factors pursuant to Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664. The Board found that apportionment to causation
consistent with Brodie and Benson was applicable and might preclude an award of 100 percent permanent
disability, even when the worker is unable to compete in the open labor market [Morris v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (2014) 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1348 (writ den.); see also Sasco Electric v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (Anemone) (2014) 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1354 (writ den.)].
ATC/VANCOM, INC. v. WORKERS’ COMP. APPEALS BD. (NAVARRO)
In one case, the Appeals Board, affirming the WCJ’s finding that a worker incurred 85 percent permanent
disability as a result of cumulative industrial injury to her hands, elbows, shoulders, neck, and psyche, held
that, while the opinion of the worker’s QME in psychiatry was substantial evidence to support a finding that
the worker’s psychiatric injury caused 69 percent permanent disability, the QME’s determination that the
worker’s psychiatric disability should be apportioned in accordance with her orthopedic disability did not rise
to the level of substantial evidence under Escobedo v. Marshalls to support apportionment, and, on this
basis, the Board did not rely on the QME’s opinion regarding apportionment [ATC/VANCOM, Inc. v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Navarro) (2014) 79 Cal. Comp. Cases 1329 (writ den.)].
CHOU v. COUNTY OF RIVERSIDE
In another case, a WCAB panel rejected a WCJ’s apportionment of 15% of the Applicant’s 8% permanent
disability to her psyche due to a lawful non-discriminatory personnel action. This case illustrates how some
psychiatrists and psychologists confuse causation of injury with causation of permanent disability, which
requires separate medical-legal analysis. In this case, the Applicant met her threshold of actual events of
Page 52 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
employment being the predominate cause of her psychiatric diagnosis, with only 15% due to a good faith
non-discriminatory personnel action. However, the WCJ erred in apportioning 15% of the permanent
disability due to this personnel action since the personnel action itself was a factor in causing permanent
disability. Since it was a factor in causing the psychiatric injury, it cannot be considered “other factors”
under the Escobedo case [see Chou v. County of Riverside, 2019 Cal. Work. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 28
(Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)].
MILLS v. AMERICAN MEDICAL RESPONSE
In a case involving orthopedic, internal, and psyche injuries occurring in two specific injuries and a
cumulative trauma claim, a WCAB panel upheld a trial judge’s findings and award of 100% permanent total
disability where the orthopedic AME was able to apportion a 49% WPI rating of permanent disability being
caused by 15% each to two separate specific injuries and 70% to the cumulative trauma injury. However,
the AME in internal medicine could not apportion his WPI ratings to the three separate injuries under
Benson. In his deposition testimony, the AME in orthopedic surgery conceded that a failed implanted spinal
stimulator is what actually caused the Applicant to be 100% disabled which cannot be apportioned between
the three injuries and that the principles of Hikida v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2017) 12 Cal. App. 5th
1249, 82 Cal. Comp. Cases 679] apply [see Mills v. American Medical Response, 2019 Cal. Work. Comp.
P.D. LEXIS 84 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision); see also Burr v. The Best Demolition &
Recycling Co., Inc., 2018 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 143, 83 Cal. Comp. Cases 1300 (Appeals Board
noteworthy panel decision) (Applicant had severe prior lumbar spinal and shoulder conditions before
admitted industrial specific injury; back surgery after industrial injury caused paraplegia; WCJ and WCAB
panel did not find Applicant 100% PTD based on Labor Code § 4662(a)(3) because he did not have
“practically total paralysis” and not entitled to 100% PTD based on Section 4662(b) “in accordance with the
fact” criteria because vocational expert report was cursory with no thorough explanation; WCJ and WCAB
panel rejected a Hikida analysis since the Applicant’s paraplegia was due to a combination of factors and
not just medical treatment for an industrial injury)].
SINGH v. STATE OF CALIFORNIA
But see also Singh v. State of California [2017 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 204 (Appeals Board
noteworthy panel decision) (WCJ reversed by WCAB panel when he found permanent total disability even
though there was an agreement that there were separate ratings for each of three injuries—53% for one
specific injury, 47% for the other specific injury, and 67% for a cumulative trauma injury, or they combined
to equal 95% permanent disability—and WCAB panel rejected vocational report as not substantial evidence
under Ogilvie and Dahl cases)]. The take away in this case is that Labor Code § 4663 and the Benson case
analysis apply even though the injured worker is permanently totally disabled from the three separate
injuries.
U.S. FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY v. WORKERS’ COMP. APPEALS BD. (HERRERA); IBRAHIM v.
CALIFORNIA DEPT. OF CORRECTIONS AND REHABILITATION; CRUZ v. CALIFORNIA HOSPITAL
MEDICAL CENTER; BALVANEDA v. OPTIONS A CHILD CARE & HUMAN SERVICES
A further take away in multiple injury cases in which AMEs or PQMEs claim that applying the concepts of
Labor Code § 4663 and Benson are impossible because the permanent disability is “inextricably
intertwined” is that the physicians each have to explain why the approximate percentages of permanent
disability cannot be parceled out to each injury with reasonable medical probability. Counsel is reminded
that the Court and Appeals Board in Benson did not use the phrase “inextricably intertwined” at all. The
decision simply states that physicians must parcel out approximate percentages of permanent disability that
is caused by each injury and, in rare cases where they cannot, they have to explain why [see, e.g., U.S.
Fire Insurance Company v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Herrera) (2018) 83 Cal. Comp. Cases 1829 (writ
denied); Ibrahim v. California Dept. of Corrections and Rehabilitation, 2017 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS
589 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision); Cruz v. California Hospital Medical Center, 2016 Cal. Wrk.
Comp. P.D. LEXIS 685 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision); Balvaneda v. Options A Child Care &
Human Services, 2019 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 196 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)].
Page 53 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
FUENTES v. WORLD VARIETY PRODUCE
There are very few recent cases involving Labor Code § 4663(c) that mandates if an evaluating or treating
physician cannot make an apportionment determination then they should consult with another physician to
get another opinion. The cases that do fall under this issue illustrate the difference in opinions between
WCAB Commissioners where some will require compliance with Section 4663(c) while others will conclude
that defendant did not meet its burden of proving apportionment since some of the physicians indicated that
permanent disability cannot be parceled out in accordance with Benson. For example, in one case, the
Applicant suffered industrial injuries to his spine, wrists, psyche, internal system, and dental and was found
to have a 78% permanent disability without apportionment. The WCAB in a split decision reversed the WCJ
and remanded the case for further development of the record so that two out of the three physicians could
revisit apportionment between a specific injury and a cumulative trauma injury. The orthopedic surgery
AME was able to provide an apportionment determination, but the AMEs in psychiatry and internal
medicine could not. In this case, two out of three WCAB Commissioners remanded the case back to the
AMEs and, if necessary, ordered them to consult with the Applicant’s treating physicians for a final
determination on the issue of apportionment related to the Applicant’s internal and psyche permanent
disability. One Commissioner dissented and found that the fact that the AMEs in internal medicine and
psychiatry concluded that it was not possible to apportion permanent disability between the two injuries
constituted substantial medical evidence because they explained why they could not parcel out the
permanent disability between the two injuries. The dissenting Commissioner criticized the majority opinion
by in essence stating that the majority substituted their own lay opinion and judgement for that of physicians
[see Fuentes v. World Variety Produce, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 280 (Appeals Board noteworthy
panel decision); see also Farren v. State of CA Dept. of General Services, 2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D.
LEXIS 589 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision); Hamilton v. Hemborg Ford, 2016 Cal. Wrk. Comp.
P.D. LEXIS 458 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision); Gallegos v. Groth Brothers Chevrolet, 2016
Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 455 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)].
KLAUS v. ANTELOPE VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT
An excellent case to read that has all of the elements of substantial medical evidence on the issue of
apportionment pursuant to overlapping parts of body and between separate injuries under Benson is Klaus
v. Antelope Valley School District [2018 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 381 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel
decision)].
KNAPP v. DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES
A WCAB panel reaffirmed the finding in Vargas v. Atascadero State Hospital [(2006) 71 Cal. Comp. Cases
500 (Appeals Board en banc)] where an Applicant obtained a Joint Stipulation With Request for Award for
three separate injuries she sustained prior to the enactment of SB 899. In 1998, she was awarded a 25%
permanent disability in a Joint Award based on no apportionment. She received $16,277.50. The Applicant
filed a timely Petition to Reopen, and the parties agreed to an AME on all three cases. In 2016, which was
18 years after the original Award and Petition to Reopen were filed, the AME opined that the Applicant is
limited to semisedentary work, apportioning “that additional new and further disability results in
approximately 20% from the work injury on 12/4/1996, approximately 50% from the 1/6/1997 injury, and
approximately 30% due to non-industrial factors with naturally progressive lumbar degenerative changes.”
But since the original award was not apportioned between the three injuries, the WCAB panel ordered the
reduction of the new permanent disability rating by the 30% apportionment to non-industrial factors and
awarded 52% permanent disability, subtracting the dollars that were originally awarded from the
$47,982.50, which was for the 52% permanent disability amount for injuries in the 1990s [see Knapp v.
Department of Social Services, 2019 Cal. Work. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 102 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel
decision)].
PAPPAS v. COUNTY OF SANTA BARBARA
An interesting case issued that involves the application of both Labor Code §§ 4664 and 4663. In this case,
the Applicant police officer received a 48% permanent disability award for cumulative trauma to his cervical
Page 54 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
spine from March 1985 through November 2005. This case was never reopened. The Applicant had a
cervical spine fusion surgery in 2010 with a stormy recovery. But he returned to light duty performing
computer work in 2013. The Applicant filed a new cumulative trauma case for the period September 2013
through September 2014 to his cervical spine. An AME opined that he has an 80% permanent disability and
concluded that the two cumulative trauma injuries are “inextricably intertwined” under Benson. The WCAB
panel concluded that the Applicant’s 48% prior award is conclusively presumed to still exist under Labor
Code § 4664 and Kopping. The WCAB panel concluded that the prior award of 48% must be subtracted
from the current 80% permanent disability regardless of whether any of the Applicant’s 32% remaining
permanent disability should be apportioned. Since the AME opined that he could not apportion between the
two injuries, the remaining 32% new permanent disability was not subject to further apportionment under
Section 4663 [see Pappas v. County of Santa Barbara, 2019 Cal. Work. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 319 (Appeals
Board noteworthy panel decision)].
OJOKO v. STATE OF CA DEPT. OF STATE HOSPITALS
In another case involving Labor Code § 4664(b) and the Brodie and Fuentes cases, a nurse stipulated to
two psychiatric injuries, one for 1% permanent disability for a 7/23/06 injury and another psyche injury of
19% from a 12/27/06 date of injury. She then filed a new cumulative trauma injury to her psyche from 2000
through 1/5/2015. Prior to apportionment, her permanent disability rating as of 2015 was 27% with a
diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The issues presented in the case is (1) whether under
Brodie and Fuentes, should the WCJ have calculated the percentage of PD attributed to the new 2015
cumulative trauma injury by subtracting the final PD ratings for the Applicant’s prior psychiatric injury from
the new PD; and (2) whether there should have been apportionment under Section 4664(b) because
Defendant proved overlap of the prior PD and the current PD? The WCAB panel first held that you subtract
the percentages from the prior awards from the current permanent disability rating and you do not subtract
dollar values of the prior awards from the dollar value of the current PD rating. The WCAB panel held that
under Section 4664(b) and the Kopping case [142 Cal. App. 4th at 1106], the prior awards of 19% and 1%
psychiatric permanent disability are conclusively presumed to still exist. Therefore, the case law cited above
mandate that these preexisting un-reopened 1% and 19% psychiatric permanent disability awards must be
subtracted from the Applicant’s undisputed current overall industrial psychiatric disability of 27%, and so,
the new injury caused 7% permanent disability, after apportionment [see Ojoko v. State of CA Dept. of
State Hospitals, 2019 Cal. Work. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 319 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)].
HOM v. CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO; VIRAY v. PG&E; PEARSALL v. CITY OF VALLEJO
In 2017 and 2018, the WCAB panels are trending certain ways in cases involving prior awards and the
application of Labor Code § 4664 and Kopping. The main take away in these cases is that the Defendant
has two burdens of proof: the first being to show that there is a prior award, and the second that there is
overlapping permanent disability between the old injury and the current one. If the Defendant is able to
prove overlap, then the old permanent disability award is subtracted from the current permanent disability
rating. The third takeaway from these cases is that if the Defendant cannot prove overlap, it may still meet
its burden of proof for apportionment of permanent disability under Labor Code § 4663 [see, e.g., Hom v.
City and County of San Francisco, 2018 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 431 (Appeals Board noteworthy
panel decision) (prior award was 20% permanent disability based on DRE method for spinal impairment
ratings, current WPI was based on range of motion (ROM) method, WCAB panel held that Defendant failed
to prove overlap since impairment was based on different methods in AMA Guides); Viray v. PG&E, 2017
Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 400 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision) (WCJ cannot make finding of
apportionment based on “range of evidence” from conflicting medical reports; WCJ must develop record or
choose which reporting constitutes substantial medical evidence on issue of apportionment under either
Labor Code § 4664 or 4663); Pearsall v. City of Vallejo, 2018 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 289 (Appeals
Board noteworthy panel decision) (WCJ reversed by WCAB panel when judge subtracted prior award
based on 1988 PDRS rating from post SB 899 permanent disability based on WPI rating from 2005 PDRS;
judge tried to assign DRE impairment rating retroactively based on medical report from 988 case, which
WCAB panel would not allow since it was speculative what such a rating would be and there was no
medical evidence of WPI rating under 2005 PDRS)].
Page 55 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
JELENIC v. LOS ANGELES DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND POWER
An Appeals Board panel upheld a trial judge’s determination that the injured worker sustained a 100%
permanent total disability with no basis for apportionment. The trial judge and Appeals Board panel relied
on an AME’s conclusions along with the opinion of a credible vocational expert. The injured worker did not
rely on the presumption of total disability for “permanent mental incapacity” under Labor Code Section
4662(a)(4) but rather utilized a conventional way to achieve a 100% award—based on a combination of the
physical and mental medical impairments, and vocational expert opinion. Perhaps as a precursor to the
Appeals Board’s en banc decision in Nunes discussed in ch. 5, § 5.01[6] of this guidebook, the Appeals
Board majority panel members stated: “[It] may properly base a finding of permanent and total disability on
a combination of substantial medical and vocational evidence” (citing Lamas v. Allen Construction, 2021
Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 195). Also in this case the defendant did not develop the record since the
AME physician’s conclusions on apportionment of permanent disability did not constitute substantial
medical evidence. Since defendant has the burden of proving apportionment of permanent disability, the
conclusions of the AME in neurology was ignored as to his conclusions on apportionment but relied upon
for permanent disability.
The injured worker had a prior brain injury that resulted in “subclinical or compensated cognitive
disturbance” prior to the industrial injury that occurred in this case. But the Appeals Board agreed with the
trial judge, who stated:
As explained in the medical evidence provided by both these AMES, the industrial head trauma
brought to surface the subclinical or compensated cognitive disturbance already present, and
permanently altered it to applicant’s detriment. (Opinion on Decision p. 5). The issue then becomes [ …
] the applicant’s significant cognitive impairment, which currently renders him unable to return to his
usual and customary duties or seek out gainful employment. The Court found that this alone was
sufficient to find total permanent disability.
The caveat in this case is that the date of injury was in 1997 and it took until 2023 for the litigation to end in
this Appeals Board final decision. It is probable with this type of case occurring under the AMA Guides that
the result regarding apportionment of permanent disability would have been more nuanced. This is because
a neurologist would probably be able to assess a pre-work injury assessment of the injured worker’s
cognitive disabilities. In the Jelenic case, the Appeals Board reiterates that regardless of whether the 1997
PDRS or the 2005 PDRS applies in a case, LeBouef is still good law:
As our Supreme Court stated long ago in LeBoeuf v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1983) 34 Cal.3d
234, 243 [193 Cal. Rptr. 547, 48 Cal. Comp. Cases 587, 666 P.2d 989], “[j]ust as retraining may
increase a worker’s ability to compete in the labor market, a determination that he or she cannot be
retrained for any suitable gainful employment may adversely affect a worker’s overall ability to
compete. Accordingly, that factor should be considered in any determination of a permanent disability
rating.”
The Jelenic case also reminds us of the medical issues involving traumatic brain injuries—the effect of
more than one head trauma is greater than the sum of each one separately. The Appeals Board quotes a
credible neurologist AME, who stated in his report about multiple head traumas in a lifetime:
Agreed Medical Evaluator (AME) in neurology, stated in his first report dated April 19, 2016:
“Reviewing the [deposition AME in orthopedics], it is evident the [applicant] made substantial recovery
from his initial [1992 automobile related head] injury, however it is also evident that cerebral reserve in
patients of this type is impaired or lost which means that a second injury of similar, greater or lesser
magnitude can bring to the surface or aggravate an underlying subclinical or compensated cognitive
disturbance. In this respect as relates the injury of 6/10/[97] in my opinion the [applicant’s]
neurocognitive dysfunction has decompensated. Emotional factors were also relevant, including
anxiety and depression, which are known to alter cognition as described in the [relevant medical]
literature.”
The Appeals Board in Jelenic concluded that the statement by the AME in neurology that the earlier 1992
traumatic brain injury resulted in the applicant’s cerebral condition as a “subclinical or compensated
cognitive disturbance” implies that applicant had no cerebral disability at the time of the 1997 industrial
Page 56 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
injury. One Appeals Board commissioner dissented and would have ordered the record more fully
developed on the issue of apportionment under the Escobedo case or would have agreed with the
neurologist AME’s apportionment determination [see Jelenic v. Los Angeles Department of Water and
Power, 2023 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 103 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)].
BAKER v. CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS AND REHABILITATION
This case provides information on how far and to what extent the “heart trouble” presumption and the anti-
attribution statute on apportionment apply to safety members under the Labor Code. The applicant, a prison
correctional officer who performed custodial duties, suffered a right eye injury occurring from the obstruction
of retinal blood flow. The retinal blood flow obstruction was caused by cardiovascular hypertensive disease.
The Appeals Board upheld a trial judge’s conclusion that the heart trouble presumption of Labor Code
Section 3212.2 applies and, therefore, there is no apportionment due to the anti-attribution statute of Labor
Code Section 4663(e) even though the injury manifested itself with an eye injury.
The trial judge cited Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(Alexander) [(2008) 166 Cal. App. 4th 911, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 920, 73 Cal. Comp. Cases 1294], which affirms
existing law that Labor Code Section 4663(e) mandates that presumptively compensable injured parts of
body for safety members listed in Labor Code Section 3212.2 are prohibited from apportionment of
permanent disability. The question presented in this case is did the injured worker sustain an eye injury or
heart trouble that is subject to the presumption of compensability and anti-attribution for apportionment?
Case law to date liberally defines what constitutes “heart trouble” for the purpose of determining whether
the employee gets the presumption and anti-attribution clause.
In Muznik v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(1975) 51 Cal. App. 3d 622, 124 Cal. Rptr. 407, 40 Cal. Comp.
Cases 578], the Court of Appeal wrote the following in defining “heart trouble”:
[T]he phrase “heart trouble” assumes a rather expansive meaning. This result is further evidenced by
the Legislature’s decision not to utilize a medical term or to list or require any specific malady for the
presumption of [§] 3212 to become operative, but rather, to employ a lay term which is not necessarily
related to physical deterioration or “disease” at all. As defined in Webster’s Dictionary, the term
“trouble” when used as a noun covers a wide range of meanings, including distress, affliction, anxiety,
annoyance, pain, labor, or exertion. The intent of the authors of the amendment adding the phrase
“heart trouble” to [§] 3212 was no doubt to have the meaning of that phrase encompass any affliction
to, or additional exertion of, the heart caused directly by that organ or the system to which it belongs, or
to it through interaction with other afflicted areas of the body, which, though not envisioned in 1939,
might be produced by the stress and strain of the particular jobs covered by the section. [Muznik,
supra, 40 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 587.]
The medical-legal internal medicine evaluator concluded that the injured worker sustained a “cerebral
vascular accident” resulting from hypertensive heart disease. A QME in ophthalmology concluded that the
injured worker had “retinal changes consistent with a central retinal artery occlusion of the right eye
resulting from a blockage of blood to the retina of one eye.” The doctor testified in his deposition that
cardio-vascular hypertension increases the chance of having an occlusion in the eye. The trial judge then
concluded: “Given that the Applicant’s right eye injury resulted from an obstruction of retinal blood flow that
reasonably related to the Applicant’s hypertension likely having caused a ruptured blood vessel, the
undersigned WCJ determined that the right eye injury was covered under the heart trouble presumption
and was immune from apportionment due to the Applicant’s eligibility under Labor Code § 3212.2.”
Another way to look at this case from a medical standpoint is that the applicant’s cardio-vascular
hypertension resulted in end-organ disease manifested by the retinal artery occlusion. Counsel should
recall that hypertension by itself is not subject to the heart trouble presumption under Labor Code Section
3212.2. The heart trouble presumption occurs for safety members statutorily only if there is actual damage
to the heart, such as left ventricular hypertrophy from chronic or untreated hypertension, or other types of
heart trouble that can be associated with hypertension. In this case, arterial occlusion of the retinal artery
due to hypertension constitutes end organ disease from the hypertension, which is caused by the systolic
and/or diastolic extreme pressure from the heart muscle [see Baker v. California Department of Corrections
and Rehabilitation, 2023 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 126 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)].
Page 57 of 57
§ 6.03 Current Events and Medical Issues of Interest
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 6.04
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 6
Case Summaries With Commentary and Current Issues Affecting Permanent Disability Ratings
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
DISCLAIMER: The opinions expressed by the author in this article are those of the author and are not
those of the California Department of Industrial Relations, Division of Workers’ Compensation, or the
Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board.
The author has conducted many continuing medical education programs (CME) over the years and is a member of
the faculty for the California Orthopaedic Association, California Society of Industrial Medicine and Surgery,
Examworks, WorkCompCentral, and other CME and MCLE providers. At the conclusion of each continuing medical
education program, regulators for certification of the programs require a Question-and-Answer period where
attendees can ask the expert panelists questions about the content of the program. Inevitably, time runs out and the
program ends with many questions not being addressed by the expert panelists. Many questions are written by the
attendees via a text to the moderator of the program while other questions are scribbled on a piece of paper and
handed to the moderator. Sometimes you can read the doctor’s handwriting.
The purpose of this section is to answer the questions doctors ask in their continuing medical education seminars.
This section is intended to be part of the essential dialogue between the medical profession and the legal
profession concerning physician reporting in workers’ compensation cases. Remember, physicians care about their
patients—a patient’s medical outcome is extremely important to a physician and is why people become doctors in
the first place. In our workers’ compensation context, physicians get frustrated because they seldom know about
the legal outcome of cases for which they wrote reports, either as treating physicians or as medical-legal
evaluators.
There is a movement afoot in the DWC administration to address the issue of developing a formal feedback
mechanism to the medical community concerning the quality of medical-legal reporting of licensed Qualified
Medical Evaluators. Why does a particular report constitute substantial medical evidence while others do not? What
is missing from reports? Labor Code § 139.2(d)(2) requires a level of quality control for medical-legal reporting and
monitoring of that by trial judges and the Appeals Board. Quality control begins with a dialogue and this article starts
that discussion.
The questions below are taken from the CME programs and are edited to make sense of each call of the question.
The names of the doctors who asked these questions have been redacted since no one wants to embarrass
anyone.
1. Would you agree that the AMA Guides (Fifth Edition) spell out the requirements for numerous
diagnostic testing in order to provide a WCJ in many areas particularly orthopedic (spine, UE, LE)
and that failing to get these studies by the QME fails substantial medical evidence?
Actually, Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides Fifth Edition along with Cal. Code of Regulations, title 8, section
10682 and Labor Code § 4628 spell out the requirements for a medical report to constitute substantial
medical evidence. One of the elements in that rubric is to review all diagnostic studies and comment on
them. Remember, ratings under the AMA Guides are based on objective medical evidence that includes a
review of diagnostic studies. If in the clinical judgment of the medical-legal evaluator that a diagnostic study
should be conducted as part of the medical-legal evaluation process, then that study should be ordered by
the QME and made part of the case analysis requested by the parties.
Page 2 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
Most QME advocacy or joint letters tell the QME that they are pre-authorized to order diagnostic testing
such as MRI or CT scans, x-rays in orthopedic cases; blood tests, urinalysis, or other tests requested by a
physician in internal medicine. If a QME is not pre-authorized to conduct testing, then they should request
authorization to do so before a final report is issued. One problem we see as judges is when a QME issues
a Request for Authorization (RFA) for diagnostic studies. A requirement for an RFA applies only to treating
physicians pursuant to Labor Code § 4600 and Cal. Code of Regulations, title 8, section 9785, which are
outside the purview of a medical-legal evaluator. Medical-legal evaluators do not issue RFAs in these
cases.
If a medical-legal evaluator is not pre-authorized to conduct diagnostic studies, then the evaluator must
write a letter to the parties requesting authority to do so. A QME should examine the patient, review
records, read the advocacy letters if any and write a preliminary report requesting authorization to order the
studies and write a supplemental report upon receipt and review of those studies. Counsel can avoid the
delay associated with this if there is language in counsel’s advocacy letter that states, “You are authorized
to order any diagnostic testing in this matter that you believe is clinically necessary for you to determine the
medical-legal issues presented in this case, except for any that requires hospitalization.”
2. I don’t understand the diabetes/leg amputation case (where a carpenter steps on a rusty nail at work,
did not know he was diabetic, and eventually has a below-knee amputation which rates a 28% WPI
under Table 17-32, page 545). Isn’t it appropriate to say that the Applicant would not have needed
an amputation if they did not have pre-existing diabetes—is it not appropriate to apportion to the
diabetes?
This is a classic example of the issue of causation of permanent disability. But for stepping on a rusty nail at
work, the Applicant would not have lost his leg when and as it occurred. So the amputation was precipitated
by a work-related injury. The cause of the permanent disability was the injury and not the diabetes. Case
law has long held that you take an Applicant the way you find him. See Ballard v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. [(1971) 3 Cal. 3d. 832, 92 Cal. Rptr. 1, 36 Cal. Comp. Cases 34, 478 P. 2d 937], Braewood
Convalescent Hospital v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Bolton) [(1983) 34 Cal. 3d 159, 193 Cal. Rptr. 157,
48 Cal. Comp. Cases 566, 666 P. 2d 14].
This example is a very difficult case, and an argument can be made that the diabetes also caused the
amputation and perhaps 50% of the impairment (28% WPI) should be apportioned to the non-industrial
diabetes. This argument would be similar to the case where a non-industrial ear condition that was
aggravated by noise exposure at work resulting in total deafness in that ear and the Court found that
permanent disability was apportioned between the industrial and non-industrial causes. See ACME Steel v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Borman), [(2013) 218 Cal. App. 4th 1137, 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 751]. See
also City of Petaluma v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Lindh) [(2018) 29 Cal. App. 5th 1175, 83 Cal. Comp.
Cases 1869], where a police officer’s pre-existing left eye ischemic optic neuropathy was aggravated by his
police dog striking his head repeatedly during a training exercise, resulting in total blindness in the left eye,
was held to be 85% non-industrial and 15% industrially related. The court in Lindh said: “We perceive no
relevant distinction between allowing apportionment based on a pre-existing congenital or pathological
condition and allowing apportionment based on a pre-existing degenerative condition caused by heredity or
genetics.”
Diabetes is frequently ignored by patients because, like hypertension, there is a denial of symptoms. The
symptoms of Type 2 diabetes include thirst, frequent urination, hunger, fatigue, blurred vision, weight gain
or loss; poor wound healing. These symptoms may or may not occur and when they do, they can be elusive
as to the cause. The Applicant in the case example is a typical employee who may not have health
insurance or if he did he never used it. Many workers live with diabetes without knowing they have the
condition, even when it is severe. Diabetes may be hereditary but, so far, science has not determined if
there is a genetic link and there is no known genetic genotype to describe diabetes.
So an AME in the case involving the carpenter who stepped on a rusty nail opined no apportionment for the
below knee amputation because the direct cause of the amputation was the industrially related specific
injury itself—stepping on a rusty nail at work. When examining risk factors, medical-legal evaluators should
not apportion to the risk factor (in this case diabetes) that makes a worker at greater risk of suffering a
Page 3 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
disability, they need to apportion to what caused the disability. The AME also opined that the employer was
responsible for getting the non-industrial diabetes under control in order to properly treat the wound caused
by the rusty nail and the resulting amputation of the leg. This example reflects the difficulty doctors have in
determining apportionment of permanent disability since cogent arguments can be made by both sides for
and against apportionment and the judge has to determine which conclusions constitute the most
persuasive, reliable, and convincing upon which to base an award of benefits. This case was also a final
examination question for law students at Pepperdine Caruso School of Law during the 2021 semester.
3. When rating lower extremities are you suggesting that every abnormality should be rated? Strength
and atrophy? A Table 17-33 total knee rating and atrophy/weakness?
The simple answer is “yes.” In order for a medical-legal report to constitute substantial medical evidence,
the evaluating physician should provide all ratable impairments. The next step is to determine if those
impairments are caused by the industrial injury. The problem is whether the physician should apply Table
17-2, the cross-usage chart that eliminates what the authors of Chapter 17 of the AMA Guides characterize
as “overlap and duplication.” The problem with Table 17-2 is that it does not account for loss of work
abilities—it only addresses lower extremity impairments that cannot be rated together. There is no
explanation of why.
There is no explanation in the text in the AMA Guides why certain lower extremity impairments cannot be
rated together. There is no discussion about why a specific WPI rating classification cannot be rated with
another. There is no equivalent Table 17-2 cross-usage chart in the upper extremity Chapter 16 of the AMA
Guides. So for the purpose of a medical-legal evaluation, a physician can rate gait derangement under
Table 17-5 and atrophy under Table 17-6, combine them using the Combined Values Chart (or not—more
on the Kite case later) and allow for each WPI rating to apply despite Table 17-2. In fact, most AMEs and
QMEs ignore Table 17-2 which is best practices because it is so arbitrary since there is no explanation of
the rationale for it.
4. I always have a concern about the spread of the point system for a total knee replacement WPI rating
from Tables 17-35 and 17-33. So if the points add up to between 50 and 84, the patient gets a 20%
WPI, if the patient has 49 points they get a 30% WPI. That one point is a 10% difference in a WPI
rating! How do we address this issue?
So the response is that the higher the points, the lower the WPI rating. Out of 100 points that are added, 50
of them account for pain and functional loss. So a QME can manipulate the scoring by raising or lowering
the pain/functional points to reflect more accurately the individual’s total knee replacement result—good,
fair, or poor. The question here is, did the patient have a good, fair, or poor result for the total knee
replacement? Is 49 points for pain/functional loss more accurate than 50 points? If so, why?
5. What are some of the more common problems that judges see in psyche PQME reports and why?
The most common problem is that QMEs do not apply the criteria in Rolda correctly. See Rolda v. Pitney
Bowes, Inc. [(2001) 66 Cal. Comp. Cases 241 (Appeals Board en banc opinion)]. That is because a “Rolda
analysis” is like a ping-pong ball going back and forth between the judge and the QME. Many great QMEs
in psyche cases are able to cover the Rolda analysis by using an “if and then” approach. So they would say
in their report: “If the judge finds these events to be actual events of employment, and if the judge finds
each of these events good faith, non-discriminatory, lawful personnel actions, I would opine that each event
has caused ____________% of the DSM diagnosis, adding up to 100% causation of the DSM diagnosis.”
Then there has to be a separate analysis of the causation of permanent disability after indicating the GAF
score and equivalent WPI rating if the injured worker is MMI on a psychiatric basis. Many psyche QMEs
confuse causation of injury which requires the Rolda analysis with causation of permanent disability (the
GAF-WPI rating and apportionment, if any, to industrial and non-industrial factors).
In summary, the Rolda analysis requires:
a. Is there is DSM diagnosis (which can be from the DSM-5 and is determined by the doctor)?
b. Are actual events of employment the predominant cause of the DSM diagnosis? That is a doctor’s
determination.
Page 4 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
c. What are the actual events of employment? The judge determines what are actual events of
employment. The doctor has to tell the judge what the doctor believes are actual events of employment
and are not a figment of the Applicant’s imagination.
d. Are any of the actual events of employment personnel actions? This is determined by the judge.
e. Are personnel actions in good faith, lawful, non-discriminatory? This is determined by the judge.
f. Do the good faith, lawful non-discriminatory personnel actions substantially cause (35-40%) the DSM
diagnosis? This is determined by the doctor.
This author has recommended that a judge conduct a discovery hearing before a case is referred to a
psychiatrist or psychologist to make the medical determinations. It is easier for a judge to decide what
constitutes actual events of employment and whether any of them are personnel actions and, if so, which
are in good faith, etc. and which are not. The judge would order the Summary of Evidence from witness
testimony to be sent by the parties to the QME in psyche to review along with the judge’s findings
concerning whether any personnel actions occurred and, if so, whether they were in good faith or not. Plus
the doctor would have to consider any non-industrial causation of a DSM diagnosis.
6. What is an Order Suspending Action? Why did I receive one? What did I do wrong?
An Order Suspending Action (OSA) is issued by a workers’ compensation judge when there is something
wrong with a settlement document, either Stipulations With Request for Award or a Compromise and
Release agreement. The problem could be clerical, for example, where a party fails to sign the document.
Or the problem could be substantive, addressing deficiencies in the settlement itself. The reason a QME or
PTP would receive a copy of an OSA is usually because something is wrong with the physician’s
conclusions about the WPI rating, if there is one, that formed the basis of a settlement.
One example is when there is a 0% Stipulations With Request for Award where the treating physician or
QME writes in their MMI report that there is no permanent impairment as a result of an industrial injury. In
fact, in that case there is ratable impairment that the physician failed to recognize. Usually this happens
when the injured worker returns to his or her usual and customary occupation after an accepted injury and
the job duties are arduous. Many physicians, especially old school ones, think that releasing someone to
regular duties implies there is no permanent disability. That assumption is not legally or medically correct if
there are permanent objective medical findings.
So judges see cases like this with a submitted proposed settlement for approval where the QME rates 0%
WPI and there probably is some ratable impairment that the QME failed to identify. This has occurred with
shoulder injuries where there is a distal clavicle resection arthroplasty and, despite the surgery, the QME
opines there is no permanent impairment because the shoulder range of motion is normal, muscle strength
under Table 16-35 is normal, and the injured worker has returned to the same job with no restrictions. The
distal clavicle resection arthroplasty is a diagnosis based WPI rating of 10% upper extremity or 6% WPI
regardless of the outcome of the surgery.
Judges also see cases where there is ratable loss of motion of either a shoulder or lumbar spine and the
measurements are not correctly interpreted by the QME as ratable. A very common mistake occurs when a
QME measures thigh and calf circumferences and at least 1 cm of atrophy is measured. That too is ratable
under Table 17-6. Another common mistake is where there is loss of cartilage interval in the knee joint and
the QME fails to apply Table 17-31. Judges see cases where a 0% Stipulation is based on these errors in
ratings and in Compromise and Release agreements where the parties state that the QME found no WPI
impairment ratings. Judges are trained to catch these mistakes, and all have at least one recent edition of
The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers’ Compensation (LexisNexis) to assist them.
So the reason a QME receives a copy of an OSA is because chances are the parties are going to request a
supplemental report addressing the judge’s concerns about the rating for permanent disability.
Also, a treating physician’s conclusions in an MMI report carries the same weight of evidence and
consideration by a judge concerning substantial medical evidence as the conclusions of a QME. However,
an agreed medical examiner essentially becomes both side’s doctor and the doctor’s conclusions are
generally binding on both parties. However, an AME’s conclusions must also constitute substantial medical
Page 5 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
evidence in order to support a judge’s award of benefits. There are very rare occasions when a judge will
award benefits based on a treating physician’s conclusions over an AME’s conclusions if the treating
physician’s conclusions have more credibility and persuasiveness than those from the AME.
7. How do you define a strict or traditional AMA Guides determination that must be performed prior to
performing an Almaraz-Guzman analysis? What do you mean by being accurate? Scientifically?
According to AMA? Equitably?
A strict rating referred to in Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) [(2010)
187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837], is one that is solely based on the
literal reading of the AMA Guides and driven by the diagnosis based, functional loss, or anatomic ratings
within the Guides. So if a medical condition is not listed in the Guides, such as plantar fasciitis or
fibromyalgia, the WPI rating would be 0% under a strict rating. Also, carpal tunnel syndrome would be rated
strictly under the rubric of page 495 of the Guides without any leeway to expand the analysis and include
functional loss.
An “accurate rating” as indicated by the District Court of Appeal in the Almaraz-Guzman case refers to the
ability of a QME or AME to veer away from a strict WPI rating and apply any other WPI rating method that
more accurately reflects a person’s impairment, especially in ADL and work functioning. Sometimes, the
most accurate rating is the strict rating. QMEs and AMEs are considered experts in evaluating work
disabilities according to Chapters 1 and 2 of the AMA Guides. So physicians can consider a wider range of
impairment rating methods that may capture a person’s impairment much better than a mechanical
application of the Guides. The best example of this is for carpal tunnel syndrome where the strict rating is
based on one of the three methods of rating listed on page 495: post-surgical 5% UE; 0% with full recovery
and no residual signs, symptoms, or complaints; or application of Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15. An
alternative rating method would include grip loss, loss of dexterity and others in Chapters 13 and 16 of the
AMA Guides.
A QME or AME who wants to apply a “more accurate rating” would have to explain why the strict rating is
not accurate and why an alternative rating is more accurate. So a good explanation that states grip loss is
more accurate in a specific case is more accurate because the three methods to rate carpal tunnel
syndrome does not capture all of the other things that are also wrong with the person’s hand, such as
thenar or hypothenar atrophy, A-1 pulley dysfunction, or DeQuervain’s tenosynovitis.
So the term accuracy refers to the overall big picture of how an impairment is affecting a person’s ADL
functioning including work activities.
8. The parties often make convincing arguments on both sides that the Kite Analysis should either
apply or not apply. The Venn diagram is often not black or white. In cases of uncertainty, is the
default to use the Combined Values Chart (CVC)? Do you expect the CVC chart to be used still in
most cases? More than 90% of cases to use the CVC for example? Or do you believe that adding
will become standard? Which way is the wind blowing?
The Kite decision (Athens Administrators v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Kite) (2013) 78 Cal. Comp.
Cases 213 (writ denied), and cited in Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. (La Count) (2015) 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 470 (writ denied)) indicates that the CVC may not
apply if there is a “synergistic effect” of injuries to more than one part of body that increases the difficulties
in performing ADLs. In Kite, the physician explained why the CVC should not apply in the case since the
patient had bilateral hip replacements and normally, one hip replacement will result in a patient adapting to
having an artificial joint by relying on the remaining natural joint. In this case, with both hip joints being
replaced with artificial ones, the Applicant’s adjustment to them will never be the same functionally as he
would have had with one natural joint, so there was a synergistic effect of ADL function having had two joint
replacements.
Cases since La Count and Kite indicate it is not a question about synergy but is more a question about
accuracy of the WPI ratings. The physician in Kite explained why the CVC should not apply in this case,
and the conclusions constituted substantial medical evidence.
Page 6 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
In answer to the question, the CVC chart applies as a default in accordance with the 2005 Permanent
Disability Rating Schedule and the AMA Guides in Chapter 1 on pages 9-10. So, in every case, the QME,
AME or PTP must first use the CVC. However, the physician must state the reasons for his or her
conclusion that the CVC should not apply in a particular case. In many cases, not applying the CVC will
result in a life pension permanent disability rating (70% or higher), so there is a lot at stake in many of those
cases. Physicians need to explain in each case why they do not believe application of the CVC is accurate
and why adding impairment ratings are. For example, physicians have been justified adding impairments
for a failed back fusion adding a psychiatric permanent impairment rating from depression or chronic pain
under the DSM-5 somatic related disorders.
In answer to the specific question, the CVC still applies in most cases and only the more astute QMEs and
AMEs correctly apply the principles of Kite and La Count.
9. If a second injury is a consequence of a first injury (e.g., psyche secondary to orthopedic), does that
affect the argument as to whether the CVC applies or whether the disabilities should be added? If
there is no overlap but also no synergy, are impairments added or combined (e.g., a thumb and
sleep disorder)?
These were separate questions asked by a member of the audience from the ones above in item 8. The
question is not whether there are compensable consequential injuries that justify adding instead of
combining separate parts of body injured. As indicated in the previous discussion, the question is, does
application of the CVC result in an inaccurate WPI rating? Does the rating using the CVC underestimate the
effects of the separate impairments on the Applicant’s ADL and work functioning? If so, how, and why? The
discussion is not about a separate injury as indicated in the question; it is an issue about parts of body
injured as the result of the industrial injury.
The physician has to address these issues specifically and explain how and why adding the impairments is
more accurate for a specific injured worker. In orthopedic, psyche, and internal cases arising out of a single
injury (specific or cumulative trauma), there may be overlap between the internal (if it is hypertension) and
the psyche condition but not with the orthopedic condition. Any one of these specialists could comment
upon the relationship and interactions between the impairments from multiple specialties.
10. Regarding the AMA Guides, the use of the word ratings are “generally combined” imply that the
authors of the Guides intended all but clearly synergistic ratings to be combined? If impairments
are added and they add up to over 100%, what happens? What do you do when the AMA
impairment ratings for separate body parts/regions do not overlap but functional activities do
overlap—do you add when there is no overlap, or combine when there is functional overlap?
It seems that this audience was fixated on CVC vs. adding impairments since so many questions were
asked on this subject. The vast majority of cases do not involve or justify adding impairments, so the CVC
is always the default. Everyone is urged to read Section 1.4 on pages 9-10 of the AMA Guides which
concede that some impairments are additive and even some could be multiplicative. QMEs and AMEs are
urged to jettison the term “synergistic” in favor of a more nuanced explanation of why the CVC should not
apply and the ratings are more accurate to add them. Again, look at the entire person—how do multiple
ratable impairments affect the person’s daily activities compared to someone who only has one of the
impairments? How and why do you justify adding the impairments?
If impairments add to over 100%, remember the caution from Labor Code § 4664(c)(1): There are seven
regions of the body and no one impairment can exceed 100% for each region for the lifetime of the injured
worker. So you would default to 100% permanent total disability. Hint: any WPI rating or combined ratings
equal to or greater than 72% WPI rate to 100% permanent disability since WPI ratings are increased by
40% when adjusted under the Permanent Disability Rating Schedule by the 1.4 adjustment factor, age, and
occupation.
There is no set rule or guideline about whether or not you combine when there is overlap for functional loss
and add if there is no overlap of functional loss concerning WPI ratings for different body parts or systems.
Functional loss assumes the WPI rating is based on functional loss which might not be the case.
Remember, WPI ratings are derived from functional loss, anatomic loss, or diagnosis based. So the QME
or AME would have to discuss how and why there is overlap, if any, between disparate rating methods in a
Page 7 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
single case. Each case has to be determined by its own facts, so there is no set rule on adding or
combining. The real question is whether or not the QME or AME’s explanation of adding or combining is
persuasive, credible, and convincing evidence upon which to support an award of benefits.
11. How can one objectively assess maximal exertion for motor power?
There are a number of ways to clinically evaluate whether or not a patient is exerting maximal effort. For
example, an examiner could hold the patient’s forearms during dynamometer grip testing as the patient
flexes the arm muscles to squeeze the handles of the dynamometer. Also during testing ankle strength for
motor function, the physician can test flexion of the great toe later in the examination and compare strength
since both test the same nerve distribution. Finally, the physician can request the patient to perform an
activity that requires motor function while distracting the patient, e.g., dropping something to the floor and
asking the patient to pick it up; asking the patient to pick up his shoes to test the ability to bend. The
number of distraction tests are limited to the imagination of the examiner.
12. Cumulative trauma (CT) injuries are still confusing. If the injured worker worked one year in a
manual job but 20 years in other manual jobs and had degenerative disc disease of the spine, is it
still a CT? Is only 1/20th related to recent work? You seem to say it qualified for CT, I agree, but I do
not know how to proceed from that. [Another physician asked: “How long—6 months or 1 year—
would be the cumulative trauma?”]
In the Coltharp case, the Court of Appeal defined the concept of “injurious exposure.” See Aetna Cas. &
Surety Co. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Coltharp) [(1973) 35 Cal. App. 3d 329, 110 Cal. Rptr. 780, 38
Cal. Comp. Cases 720], as a series of incidents at work that eventually cause lost time or a need for
medical treatment beyond first aid and a follow- up visit. See also Labor Code § 3208.1(b), which
specifically says: a cumulative injury “occurring as repetitive mentally or physically traumatic activities
extending over a period of time, the combined effect of which causes any disability or need for medical
treatment. The date of a cumulative injury shall be the date determined under Section 5412.”
Labor Code § 5412 establishes the actual “date of injury” which is an actual fixed date. That is the date
where there is a concurrence of disability and knowledge, where the employee finds out their condition is
caused by a work-related cumulative trauma and the employee suffers from a disability due to that. The
disability can be temporary total, temporary partial, permanent partial, or permanent total. The employee’s
knowledge that the condition is work related can come from a physician, an attorney, or any other person
who informs the employee that the condition is work related.
Labor Code § 5500.5 establishes liability for a CT injury: the date of the concurrence of disability and
knowledge or the last date of injurious exposure, which ever occurred earliest. This section also establishes
the liability for cumulative trauma injuries. So, in the physician’s example above, where there is 1 year of
employment in an arduous job with 20 prior years in an arduous job, the cumulative trauma period would be
for the last 21 years with liability for all 21 years on the last year of injurious exposure, i.e., whoever
employed the employee during the last year. Yes, the most recent employer “buys” the entire 21 years of
injurious exposure. The rationale for this is economics. Liability for CT injuries is spread throughout a given
industry. Think about the movie and television production field. People work for various employers over a
30-year period in usually arduous jobs, from camera operators, stunt people, production assistants, prop
makers, prop movers, etc. Liability for CT injuries are spread throughout the production companies who
employ these people over the years.
Here is another question on the same subject of CT injuries: what if I, as a QME, make a finding that
there is a cumulative trauma injury, but the defense attorney says in his advocacy letter that there is
a claim for a specific injury?
That is an excellent question. The law allows for what is called “amending the pleadings to conform to
proof.” So if a physician finds that an alleged specific injury actually is the culmination of a cumulative
trauma injury, the physician should say so and state how and why he or she came to that conclusion. It is
never substantial medical evidence for a QME or AME to state that whether or not there is a cumulative
trauma, injury is “deferred to the trier of fact.” The QME or AME is the medical expert, and the judges are
Page 8 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
relying on their evaluation of a claim to determine if the injury is from a specific injury, cumulative trauma
injury, or is non-industrial.
13. I am still receiving duplicates or triplicates of records (from the same party) and extraneous pages
(subpoenas, faxes, etc.). If all those pages are included in the attorney declaration, are we
supposed to spend what could be hours sorting through and eliminating extraneous pages and
only count the pages of actual records? I believe I have heard we should because the medical-legal
fee schedule states “relevant” documents. This could become very time intensive when there are
hundreds or thousands of pages.
While this question has nothing to do with WPI ratings, it is an important issue to discuss here since the
new medical-legal fee schedule went into effect for examinations or depositions of physicians that occur on
or after April 1, 2021. The regulations can be found at Cal. Code of Regulations, title 8, section 9795. The
general reason for the question is that the first 200 pages of records review are included in the set fees for
a comprehensive medical-legal examination and a $3.00 per page charge for any records greater than 200
pages. So it could become expensive for claims administrators to pay for a medical-legal evaluator
reviewing thousands of pages of duplicative records.
One suggestion if this happens is for the QME or AME to examine the patient, write an initial report and
indicate in that report that a record review of relevant documents is not possible until the party that sent
them eliminate duplicative documents and that a supplemental report will be issued once the non-duplicate
and relevant records are correctly sent for review. See Cal. Code of Regulations, title 8, section 35(i), which
says the medical-legal evaluator wait 10 days for records to be received and then write the initial report and
request the records be sent and a supplemental report can be issued completing the initial medical-legal
process.
It is not recommended that physicians review all records including duplicative ones and then bill a claims
administrator $3.00 per page over 200 pages of review. This is because the physician may be looking at an
objection to the medical-legal billing for the duplicative records review since duplicative records are not
“relevant” to the examination or medical-legal conclusions, and a judge would probably disallow the cost of
review of those duplicative records.
14. For lumbar stenosis without radiculopathy, can a QME or AME use Table 15-7, Section IIc?
The answer is “yes.” This is one of the 300 inconsistencies in the AMA Guides Fifth Edition. In the text on
pages 379 to 380, the authors indicate that the default WPI rating method for spinal impairments is the DRE
method and that ROM (Range of Motion) is used sparingly and requires the existence of a “radiculopathy”
under item 2 on page 380. However, Table 15-7 (the spinal disorders table) that is used as part of the ROM
method indicates that a radiculopathy is not required for Section IIc to apply. Section II is titled
“Intervertebral disk or other soft-tissue lesion” and sub-section IIc states: “un-operated on, stable, with
medically documented injury, pain, and rigidity, associated with moderate to severe degenerative changes
on structural tests (includes an MRI with and without contrast); includes herniated nucleus pulposes with or
without radiculopathy” which for the lumbar spine is a 7% WPI. Spinal stenosis that results in an operation
has WPI ratings for spinal disorders for the Range of Motion method is on Table 15-7, Section IV.
15. For a Mumford procedure, is the rating a 10% UE (6% WPI) from Table 16-27 arthroplasties or a 15%
WPI from Table 16-18 maximum value of the acromioclavicular (AC) joint? I must be a conservative
evaluator because I just rated a case like this, so I missed the higher rating. Which one is more
accurate?
A Mumford procedure is the same thing as a distal clavicle resection arthroplasty. During the Continuing
Medical Education program, the physicians were shown two slides, one of Table 16-27 Arthroplasties of the
Upper Extremity Joints, where a resection arthroplasty of the AC joint is a 10% UE or 6% WPI rating, and
one of Table 16-18 that shows the maximum value of each upper extremity joint and the AC joint is 25% UE
or 15% WPI. Most orthopedic surgeons will say that a full Mumford procedure involves removal of the AC
joint which fills in with scar tissue and the actual joint is no longer there. Conservative medical-legal
evaluators will apply the 6% WPI arthroplasty rating from Table 16-27 because it is specific to an
arthroplasty which was performed in this case, and liberal evaluators will apply the 15% WPI removal of the
Page 9 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
joint from Table 16-18 for the same part of body and outcome simply because the joint is no longer there.
Also, there can be a partial Mumford procedure where only part of the joint is removed and the exposed
acromion or clavicle are smoothed out. So counsel should check the operative reports to see if the
procedure removed the whole joint or if only one side was removed.
16. In applying Almaraz-Guzman, does the injured worker receive one or the other WPI rating, i.e., the
strict rating or the alternative rating? Or can they receive a combination of the two? Example: a
DRE and adding lifting impairment under the hernia section [author’s note, Table 6-9].
This is a very confused physician, but he should be applauded for his honesty. The physician is missing the
point of alternative rating methods. It is all about accuracy of a rating to fit a particular case. The first step in
every case is to apply a strict rating method. Here, since the case is referring to a spinal injury, the
physician is required to start at Chapter 15 of the AMA Guides and find either a DRE or ROM rating. If
neither method is accurate, then the physician has to explain why. For example, the physician may say that
a DRE II or ROM rating method alone is not accurate based on the effect the injury has had on the
Applicant’s ADL and residual work abilities. Then the physician can jump to an alternative rating method
that he or she feels is more accurate than the strict one. The physician would have to explain why the
alternative rating is more accurate than the strict one. Finally, to seal the deal, the physician has to state his
or her conclusions are based on reasonable medical probability.
Adding or combining a DRE rating to a hernia rating from Table 6-9 may be the most accurate rating in a
case, but the physician should have a solid evidence-based reason for doing so other than the lifting
restriction in Table 6-9 is elegant since us old-school lawyers and doctors remember our cases prior to
2004 that were based on work restrictions, which we are no longer allowed to use. So the best practices
would have the physician use Table 6-9 alone and explain in his or her report why no other method for
rating WPI in this case is as accurate.
17. You implied that a QME with hand arthritis who does not physically examine and manipulate the
Applicant for ROM or strength testing is an invalid exam. Is there a valid solution for this QME?
Labor Code § 4628(a) mandates that the evaluating physician examine the patient. It specifically states:
“Except as provided in subdivision (c) [which pertains to review of records], no person, other than the
physician who signs the medical-legal report, except a nurse performing those functions routinely
performed by a nurse, such as taking blood pressure, shall examine the injured employee or participate
in the non-clerical preparation of the report…”
Cal. Code of Regulations, title 8, section 10682 mandates the information that needs to be included in
every medical-legal report, along with compliance with Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides. The bottom line is
that there cannot be a surrogate evaluator who actually examines the Applicant in the presence of the
appointed QME unless both parties agree to it. It is not unprecedented to have a qualified chiropractor
perform the measurements and examination of an Applicant in the presence of the appointed QME medical
doctor who cannot physically perform the physical examination, but that occurrence is rare and requires all
parties to agree to it in advance.
Once of the most qualified physical medicine and rehabilitation physicians worked at an acute care hospital
and specialized in spinal cord injury cases, both industrially and non-industrially related. He was an
amazing practitioner and was very patient oriented. Why? Because he was a paraplegic and was unable to
examine his own patients. But he was a brilliant diagnostician and understood the needs of his patients
while they were recovering from their injuries at the hospital and how to adapt to being confined to a
wheelchair for the remainder of their lives.
18. In a deposition, a party tried to get me to give a 3% WPI rating after I stated the patient was non-
ratable, and the party asked me to give a 3% WPI for pain instead. Is it true that you can add a 3%
WPI rating for pain related impairment when there is no underlying ratable impairment?
The answer is “no.” The Permanent Disability Rating Schedule (PDRS) is a regulation that is mandated by
Labor Code § 4660.1(d)-(f). On page 1-12 of the PDRS, the Schedule indicates up to 3% WPI can be
added to an underlying WPI rating if the burden of the impairment is greater than expected by the
underlying rating. So, in the example, the physician cannot assess up to 3% WPI when there is no
Page 10 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
underlying ratable impairment. The reaction to this question is that the physician probably missed an
accurate underlying WPI rating because it is apparent the QME felt there should be a WPI impairment add-
on due to pain.
19. Can a doctor add 3% WPI pain impairment to an Almaraz-Guzman alternative rating?
That is an excellent question, and the answer is “yes.” We are looking for the accuracy of an underlying
WPI rating. This includes the step-by-step process of the physician explaining why a strict rating is not
accurate and why an alternative one is more accurate. This would be based on the underlying permanent
objective medical findings and not the Applicant’s subjective complaints. So if the subjective complaints of
pain are corroborated by the objective findings and the burden on the Applicant’s ADL functioning is greater
than expected by the underlying rating, modified by an Almaraz-Guzman analysis, then up to 3% WPI can
be added to the underlying WPI rating that was based on the Almaraz-Guzman case.
20. In terms of a WPI rating for psyche, I missed the GAF rating vs. using the AMA Guides for WPI since
the Guides have no metrics for determining psyche WPI. In a psyche case, can we use ICD-9 or
ICD-10 diagnosis along with the GAF?
Actually, the Guides do have a metric, but it gets complicated. On page 395, the authors talk about the
assessment of workplace functioning. They list four categories: Understanding and Memory; Sustained
Concentration and Persistence to carry out simple instruction; Social Interaction; and Adaptation as to the
ability to adapt to changes in the workplace. These criteria (concentration, persistence, and pace) are used
in social security disability cases. The psychiatrist or psychiatrist can then refer to Table 13-8 to provide a
WPI rating when adding to the foregoing discussion the factors listed in Classes 1 through 4 for personal
and social functioning.
The foregoing discussion is one of a few ways to rebut a strict psychiatric rating using the GAF-WPI score
that is mandated by the PDRS, discussed above. Unfortunately, there is somewhat of a conflict in the
metrics for this. Labor Code § 3208.3(a) mandates the use of the “American Psychiatric Association (APA)
DSM-III-Revised or the terminology and diagnostic criteria of other psychiatric diagnostic manuals generally
approved and accepted nationally by practitioners in the field of psychiatric medicine.” The DSM-IV and
DSM IV-Revised were adopted over the years since. However, in May 2013, the APA adopted the DSM-5,
which was issued 13 years after the previous DSM revision. The DSM-5 has current diagnostic criteria that
is markedly different from the diagnostic criteria listed in previous editions. For example, there is a pain
disorder recognized in the DSM-IV but not in the DSM-5. Instead, the DSM-5 utilizes a Somatic-Related
Disorders section that includes pain disorders. The DSM-5 has current diagnostic criteria for PTSD, which
is markedly different from previous diagnostic criteria.
Fortunately, the Almaraz-Guzman case anticipates changes and updates to diagnostic criteria as the
science of medicine advances. Physicians are allowed to utilize current diagnostic criteria under the DSM-5
and apply the analysis of a GAF score under the DSM-IV since the 5 axis of the DSM-IV are not in the
DSM-5. The PDRS has a chart that converts a GAF score into a WPI score, and every psychiatrist and
psychologist is required to use that rubric to determine a strict WPI rating. Offering an alternative WPI rating
is gladly accepted for analysis for substantiality by the judges. See Chapter 9 of The Lawyer’s Guide to the
AMA Guides and California Workers’ Compensation (LexisNexis) for a complete discussion of the
differences between the DSM-IV and the DSM-5.
An ICD-9 or ICD-10 diagnostic code is irrelevant to the discussion of what WPI rating is the most accurate
for a psychiatric permanent disability. Those codes are for billing purposes and not for a determination of
permanent psychiatric impairment.
21. A patient needs minimal treatment for TMJ and the treating dentist elects to treat with 24/7 mouth
guards and turns the case into a major mouth reconstruction costing $20,000-$30,000 when this
type of treatment is probably completely unnecessary. Is a QME allowed to comment on over
treatment by the treating dentist?
While this question does not pertain to WPI ratings, it is an interesting question to a sitting judge. First of all,
treatment for an industrial injury is driven by the Medical Treatment Utilization Schedule and the utilization
review process which are respectively mandated by Labor Code § 4610 with IMR mandated by Labor Code
Page 11 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
§ 4610.5. If TMJ treatment is self-procured in a disputed case, the QME in dentistry may comment upon the
issue of excessive treatment, which may affect the lien of the self-procured dentist. One thing is true in
some of these cases—it is extremely important for any dentist, self-procured treating, authorized treating, or
QME in dentistry to review the Applicant’s own prior dental records. Otherwise, no conclusion about
causation of dental problems will constitute substantial medical evidence.
22. What tips can you give us that apply to the physical examination of an alleged injured worker so
that our ultimate conclusions constitute substantial medical evidence?
A couple of basic initial concepts will get you through the physical examination of a patient in a medical-
legal process. First, you, as the examining physician, need to be the person who conducts the range of
motion measurements and muscle strength testing. Those aspects of an examination cannot be delegated
to another person. Secondly, when you determine the WPI ratings, if any, in a given case, do not rely on a
computer program that establishes the ratings under the AMA Guides. The AMA is in the process of
establishing an electronic version of its AMA Guides publications. This is a trap for the unwary because the
software will not account for Almaraz-Guzman alternative rating methods. Physicians need to use the
hardcover AMA Guides Fifth Edition when evaluating for accurate WPI ratings. In addition, counsel for a
party cannot cross-examine a computer program, and if you rely on one to establish a WPI rating, you may
not be able to accurately explain how you arrived at a rating that was based on a computer program.
Finally, physicians must always measure active range of motion and not passive range of motion testing.
Active range of motion means the physician does not assist the patient in the testing (e.g., a physician
cannot grab the patient’s arm and raise it 180 degrees of flexion and say there is 180 degrees of flexion).
Finally, make sure you use upper extremity (UE), lower extremity (LE), and convert to WPI correctly.
23. Are there any lower extremity ratings or nuances that are commonly missed that we need to be
aware of?
Yes, Table 17-33 is a Diagnosis Based Impairment rating system and is mostly used by physicians
because it is easy and does not depend on treatment outcomes, except for knee and hip replacements
which have a point system (see Table 17-34 for hip replacements and Table 17-35 for knee replacements).
Impairment ratings from Table 17-33 are the easiest for attorneys to rebut since the actual ratings can be
very conservative and unrealistic as to a person’s true impairment. For example, a person who has an ACL
tear or rupture has “ligament laxity” upon a positive anterior drawer sign. Once the ACL is repaired or
replaced, Table 17-33 probably does not apply because there is no longer ligament laxity if the surgery is
successful. But, empirically, we know that ACL replacements and repairs of partially torn ones do not last
and will eventually become symptomatic, unless the patient is a professional athlete.
Table 17-2, the cross-usage chart, is seldom used in our cases because application of it is too strict and
applications of it in a workers’ compensation case unrealistically result in ratings that do not reflect a
person’s actual disabilities due to multiple lower extremity ratable impairments. Think in terms of someone
with arthritis of the knee joint and an antalgic gait. Some people who have an arthritic knee do not have
symptoms or limitations of activities while others are significantly restricted in ADL functioning. Table 17-2
eliminates consideration of the variability of how multiple measurable impairments affect ADL and work
functioning. Some of us call the cross-usage chart the “anti-Kite” table.
Many physicians miss ratable impairment from Table 17-6, impairment due to leg muscle atrophy. They
express in their medical-legal reports calf and thigh measurements in inches and not in centimeters, where
Table 17-6 uses only centimeters. One centimeter of atrophy is measurable impairment on this table, which
is commonly missed by physicians.
For antalgic gait, counsel and physicians should become familiar with Tables 17-5 and Table 13-15 in
Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides. Table 17-5 is the gait derangement table, while Table 13-15 is a Station
and Gait Disorders table. Either table can be used in lower extremity cases. If a QME uses Table 13-15,
there is no requirement that the cause of the gait abnormality is due to a neurologic program as opposed to
an orthopedic condition. In other words, just because a more accurate rating method may be in another
chapter of the Guides, such as here in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, there
might be a more accurate rating method for an orthopedic case.
Page 12 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
Many times we see cases where an evaluating or treating physician in an MMI report indicates that a
person has had a “good,” “fair,” or “poor” result of a total knee or hip replacement and leaves out the actual
measurements and pain assessments required for use of Table 17-33. One case stands out where the
treating physician found a 69-year-old school employee with a total knee replacement “without any
significant residual disability, occasional pain in left knee, no further treatment is necessary, according to
AMA Guidelines [sic] page 546 Table 17-33, the patient has 15% impairment of the whole person;
apportionment is not indicated.”
This physician failed to indicate what job the injured worker had at the time of injury, what the mechanism of
injury was that led to the knee replacement, and how the physician arrived at the 15% WPI for the knee
replacement (which is a “good” result under Table 17-33). There was no listing of the 100-point system
assessment of Table 17-35 for knee replacements that includes an evaluation of residual pain due to the
knee replacement.
24. Can WPI ratings be derived from a diagnostic study or from an operative report regardless of the
outcome of the surgery itself?
Yes, in fact many WPI ratings can be obtained from just an operative report or diagnostic study where
symptoms correlate with signs, symptoms and complaints. Treating physicians and medical-legal
evaluators should always re-review the diagnostic studies and operative reports in order to make sure any
ratable impairments are captured from those reports. Distal clavicle resection arthroplasties and thumb
arthroplasties are found in Table 16-27 and you must compare Table 16-18 as discussed above to see
which application results in the most accurate rating. You can combine (or add per Kite) impairments to the
same part of body referenced in the operative report, such as loss of motion, sensory, and motor
impairments in addition to the WPI rating for the surgery itself. Any kind of fusion of a joint or the spine
should automatically be rated based on the fusion surgery itself and combined with any functional or
sensory/motor deficits.
A good example of a case involving a ratable diagnostic study occurred for a school custodian who injured
his knee on a cumulative trauma basis, with a gradual onset of pain, swelling, and clicking of the knee when
he bends it. An MRI scan showed Grade III lateral femoral condyle chondromalagia. Upon declaring the
custodian MMI, the treating physician opined that the Applicant should “sit and stand intermittently as
needed.” The MRI findings coupled with the Applicant’s signs, symptoms, and complaints should have
resulted in a discussion by the physician of Table 17-31—which, in this case, could rate 3%, 8%, or 10%
WPI due to fairly advanced arthritis of one of the three knee compartments. In addition, due to the “clicking”
of the knee joint, the physician could have justified an additional 2% WPI based on crepitus of the knee
under the footnote below Table 17-31. One thing physicians forget about is that the footnote for crepitus
states it applies “when there is direct trauma” to the knee, but the authors of the AMA Guides never account
for a cumulative trauma constituting an “injury” under its rubric. Clearly, if there is crepitus of the knee joint,
an additional 2% WPI probably applies even though the knee condition was not caused by a specific
trauma but by cumulative trauma.
25. What are the more common shoulder injuries judges see in cases with disputed WPI ratings?
We see mostly through and through tears of the rotator cuff “SITS” (Supraspinatus, Infraspinatus, Teres
Minor, and Subscapularis tendons), labral tears at the gleno-humeral joint, sub-acromial impingement, and
AC joint dysfunction resulting in a partial or total distal clavicle resection arthroplasty. Occasionally we will
see an injury to the sternoclavicular joint (SC joint).
In fact, a 0% stipulation was rejected by a judge in a case where a 55-year-old tree surgeon fell down a hill
and felt a “popping” of his SC joint with associated tingling of his neck. As a result of this injury, the
employee has episodes of his SC joint subluxing (dislocating) unexpectedly when it reduces spontaneously.
The objective findings per the PTP report states: “X-ray imaging shows deformity of mid-right clavicle
consistent with fracture, small well-corticated bony opacity just above the right first costovertebral junction.
Mild spurring of left AC joint, pain is 4/10.” On the date the PTP declared the employee MMI the doctor
administered a lidocaine injection and told the employee who had returned to work to “refrain from overuse
next three days including heavy lifting and any other strenuous activities, injection site will be sore for the
next 1-2 weeks.”
Page 13 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
The problem with this case is, for one thing, this employee has not reached MMI status unless the
physician believes his condition is MMI with or without treatment within a year, which the physician did not
say. Secondly, the physician failed to rate the condition in accordance with Tables 16-18 and 16-22 since
there is permanent damage to the employee’s SC joint. In addition, there were no manual muscle testing of
the shoulder by the physician under Table 16-35. It is clear from most SC joint dysfunctions, adduction and
internal rotation ranges of motion would be significantly affected, and was not rated in this case. A QME
properly evaluated this case and concluded the employee has an 8% WPI based on the subluxed SC joint
(Tables 16-18 and 16-26), loss of strength for adduction and internal rotation (Table 16-35).
In many cases where there was a sub-acromial decompression surgery, most patients complain of
weakness and loss of motion in some of the six ranges of motion. Virtually every person who has had some
kind of shoulder surgery complains of loss of strength, especially while lifting objects away from the body. In
one case, a 5% stipulation was rejected by a judge where permanent objective findings show that there
was loss of motion in 3 out of 6 ranges of shoulder motion and Grade 4 loss of strength in 2 out of 6 planes
of manual muscle testing. At the time the physician assigned 3% WPI, he indicated the employee has
permanent limitations of lifting over 15 lbs and has pain on a visual analog scale of 6/10. The physician
failed to mention in his MMI report what job the employee was performing when she was injured and the
mechanism of injury.
Treating and evaluating physicians should be reminded that when they issue an MMI report, they reiterate
the actual mechanism of injury (e.g., falling down a hill, reaching for a heavy item, repetitive overuse, etc.,
and the job duties at the time of injury).
Another problem is that many treating and evaluating physicians will list the loss of motion measurements
to the shoulder along with the manual muscle strength testing in the physical examination section of their
MMI report and not bring them forward to the discussion section of their report to show the permanent
impairment ratings for loss of strength and/or loss of motion. This occurred in a case that went to trial, and
the judge was able to bring forward the loss of motion and loss of strength measurements in the physical
examination section of the report and convert them to accurate UE and to WPI ratings.
Another tip that helps judges, claims examiners, and raters is to have physicians in their MMI reports
always list the population normal ranges of motion on the same page as the actual measurements of an
injured employee. Those normal ranges of motion are based on the criteria set forth in the AMA Guides
Fifth Edition and listed on their respective range of motion criteria for rating permanent impairment. This is
true for all measurable ranges of motion of all parts of body—from each individual finger or toe to the wrist,
elbow, shoulder, spine, hip, knee, and ankle.
26. When an employee with diagnosed carpal tunnel syndrome without surgery, returns to work without
restrictions, there is no impairment, correct?
Possibly, but it depends on objective factors at the time the patient is declared MMI. For example, a 47-
year-old program technician employed for 8 years developed insidious onset of left major and right mild to
moderate wrist pain, numbness, and paresthesia. She declined a referral to a hand specialist and declined
steroid injections to the wrists. Instead, she wears wrist cock-up braces at night. The EMG/NCV states:
“Mild to moderate left and right carpal tunnel syndrome with demyelinating changes in sensory and motor
nerves.” The treating physician’s MMI report included three pages of hand, wrist, and finger range of motion
measurements and stated in his conclusions: “On examination, decreased light touch sensation in bilateral
hands. No ratable impairment, return to full duty.”
This case reflects a common misconception some physicians have about the relationship, if any, between
the evaluation for impairment ratings and releasing workers back to their usual and customary work
activities with no restrictions, especially when those very work activities are precipitating a cumulative
trauma injury. Many injured workers are faced with an employer who will not take back an injured worker
who has permanent restrictions. This problem is exacerbated by the misconception by some physicians
that if someone goes back to work without restrictions, there is no impairment rating. This conclusion is a
sign that the physician is old school: from the days before 2004 when work restrictions formed the basis of
a permanent disability award and were based on subjective complaints, objective medical findings and
actual or prophylactic work restrictions. Under post-2004 injuries, such as in this example, the AMA Guides
Page 14 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
contemplates a person can have impairments but are not disabled from performing work activities. This
case is a perfect example.
In cases involving carpal tunnel syndrome, page 495 of the AMA Guides provides the three choices a
physician has to rate that condition. The first method is the default method and requires the doctor to apply
Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15 to evaluate the sensory/pain and motor function of the median nerve. The
second method is to provide a 5% UE rating for anyone who has had carpal tunnel release surgery but who
also has some residual symptoms or weakness. The third method is to assign 0% WPI for patients who
have completely recovered from carpal tunnel syndrome with no signs, symptoms or complaints. In this
example, this patient received a more accurate rating after being examined by a QME who opined she has
a Grade 4 sensory and motor deficit bilaterally with a 5% UE or 3% WPI for each wrist.
A similar problem occurred for a 43-year-old school custodian who developed bilateral lateral epicondylitis
on a cumulative trauma basis. The patient had bilateral lateral epicondylitis surgical release surgeries and
PRP injections. On declaring the patient MMI, the treating physician indicated the patient was fully capable
of returning to work without restrictions but that “epicondylitis tends to recur.” His grip strength was 80 lbs
on the right and 85 lbs on the left. Remember, the benchmark for grip strength is the dominant side, which
is usually 10% greater than the non-dominant side.
Also, based on population normal, a 43-year-old male who performs moderately arduous work as a
custodian should have a normal grip strength of 95-100 lbs on the dominant side and 85-90 lbs on the non-
dominant side. See AMA Guides, Tables 31-34. Here, the physician is forgetting that epicondylitis usually
affects the ulnar nerve that passes through the elbow and gets entrapped due to swelling of the tendons
that cause the symptoms of epicondylitis. The ulnar nerve and its distribution mostly control motor function
(i.e., grip) of the fourth and fifth fingers and the thumb. A person’s grip strength is mainly a function of the
pinky finger, ring finger, and thumb. So this patient probably has a 13% grip loss bilaterally which is a 6%
WPI rating for each hand.
In these two examples, both physicians erroneously thought that just because each worker was able to
return to his or her usual and customary job duties with no restrictions, there is no impairment. Remember,
people can perform work activities without restrictions and still have a ratable impairment.
27. How do you correctly rate a case involving a neck and shoulder from a single specific injury where I
found 0% WPI to the shoulder and DRE II 5% for the cervical spine resulting in a settlement that
was rejected by a judge?
This case involved a 50-year-old critical care nurse who was moving an intubated patient and heard a “pop”
in her right shoulder and felt tingling down her right arm with spasms in her muscles in the right side of her
neck. MRI imaging showed a 4 mm right-sided herniated disc at C4-C5 and an MRI of the right shoulder
showed 4 mm partial thickness tear of infraspinatus tendon with supraspinatus tendinosis with mild AC joint
arthritis. The nurse had an adverse reaction to a steroid injection to the cervical spine in the form of severe
vaginal bleeding. Upon MMI examination, the physician found full range of right shoulder motion, full
strength both upper extremities and “mildly positive right Spurling’s. There was tenderness to palpation right
trapezius and cervical para-spinals.” The physician opined 0% WPI for the right shoulder and DRE
Category II 5% WPI for the cervical spine. Why was the settlement rejected by the judge?
The positive Spurling test triggered the judge’s Order Suspending Action for a stipulated award based on
the only ratable condition from this physician—the DRE II 5% WPI for the cervical spine. This case is a
good example of how neck injuries can manifest themselves in the form of shoulder symptoms and how
shoulder injuries can manifest themselves with neck muscle spasms. The DRE-II is inaccurate because the
patient has a herniated disc at C4-5 with a positive Spurling test. A Spurling test is also known as a cervical
compression test that can confirm radiculopathy from nerve root irritation from a herniated disc. The patient
extends the neck by looking down and to the side where symptoms occur (on the right side in this case)
while the doctor pushes down from the top of the patient’s head. This will trigger numbness, tingling, or pain
radiating down the arm on the effected side of the nerve root irritation. The cervical spine impairment rating
should have been a DRE Category III 10-13% WPI based on the MRI, positive Spurling test and the clinical
findings. A panel QME examined the patient and opined her right shoulder had loss of strength 5% WPI
Page 15 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
under Table 16-35 for abduction, flexion, and extension due to the partially torn tendon, and a 13% WPI
DRE III rating for the cervical spine with no apportionment.
28. I have had two cases rejected by judges where I rated total and partial amputations of fingers—one
case due to a circular saw where the patient lost his middle finger at the first metacarpal joint and
the other case due to a noodle-making machine that caused partial amputations of the little, ring,
and middle fingers. I rated for loss of sensory and motor function. Did I miss something?
Yes. This is a common mistake made by physicians who evaluate partial or total amputations of a digit or
digits of the hand. Physicians need to closely follow the instructions on pages 442-443 of the AMA Guides
and need to rate (1) the amputation, (2) the sensory deficits, and (3) the motor deficits for each finger. The
finger ratings are combined and converted to a hand impairment (which is 90% of the upper extremity) and
then converted to an upper extremity rating and then to a WPI rating. Remember: the maximum upper
extremity rating is 60% WPI; an amputated hand is a 54% WPI based on the hand providing 90% of upper
extremity function. Ninety percent of 60% WPI is a 54% WPI.
29. What triggered a judge to issue an Order Suspending Action in a case involving a great toe injury
that rated 0% WPI, but the Applicant is working full time in a job that requires standing and walking
all day?
In this case, the injured worker is a 55-year-old glass product packer who had a 3400-pound wheel from a
gantry roll over his great toe causing a dislocation of the toe. He missed about a year from work and had
surgeries to the toe, including insertion of a metal pin. When he was released to return to work, he had to
wear an orthotic device on his left foot and he is able to continue to work full time without restrictions. A
judge was presented with Stipulations With Request for Award of 0% permanent disability with a provision
of future medical treatment to replace the orthotic when it wears out.
The judge rejected the settlement for three reasons. In the MMI report of the treating physician, the doctor
stated upon examination that, “the patient walks with an antalgic gait.” That alone rates a 7% WPI based on
Table 17-5. The treating physician did not realize that this language in an MMI report is a ratable permanent
impairment. Another triggering mechanism that led to the Order Suspending Action was the fact that the
Applicant missed almost a whole year from work due to this injury and two surgeries. The third trigger for
scrutiny of the 0% settlement was the fact that the Applicant had to wear an orthotic device while working a
job that requires him to be on his feet during the entire work shift.
When there is a proposed settlement of 0% permanent disability in a case involving a significant loss of
time from work, coupled with at least one surgery, a judge is obligated to scrutinize the basis of the
settlement. Here, the treating physician on his MMI examination said the Applicant has an antalgic gait on
examination. The Applicant was not represented by legal counsel and did eventually agree to be examined
by a Qualified Medical Examiner in orthopedic surgery with a sub-specialty in ankle and foot disorders.
The QME came out with a report that indicated the Applicant has “an altered gait due to muscle weakness,
limited range of motion to the first MPJ, no motion to the first IP joint, and nerve pain.” The objective
findings included “ankyloses and arthritis 1st IPJ, hallux limitus 1st MPJ, muscle weakness, calf atrophy, and
gait derangement.” The ratable impairments included loss of range of motion of the left great toe,
ankyloses, and atrophy utilizing Tables 17-40, 17-30, 17-6, and 17-37, resulting in a 10% WPI overall
impairment rating.
30. Can I use Figure 15-19 on page 427 to determine the percentage loss of function of a sub-region of
the spine? So if I believe the Applicant has lost 50% use of his lumbar spine function, that would be
50 percent of the maximum function value of the lumbar spine of 90% which equals a 45% WPI. Is
that a viable way of providing an alternative rating method under Almaraz-Guzman?
The answer is “sometimes.” A little history is in order here. As is stated in The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA
Guides and California Workers’ Compensation (LexisNexis), the use of the AMA Guides is partially based
on what this author has called political medicine—it is an attempt to provide “uniform, consistent, and
objective” methods of establishing permanent impairment and is centered on occupational medicine as the
overall construct of the various editions of the Guides. As you might expect, the content of each edition of
the Guides is politically motivated so that the AMA can make lots of money on these publications. When the
Page 16 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
Fifth Edition was being written and edited, reliable sources have indicated that Figure 15-19 was requested
by two states—Vermont and New Hampshire, which use percentage loss of function of a body part or body
system in their respective permanent disability rating schedules. So Figure 15-19 was included in the Fifth
Edition of the Guides, and many astute California physicians have utilized it as a way to rebut a strict DRE
or ROM spinal rating.
The Guides actually allows for regional WPI ratings in the text. However, it is buried a long way from page
427—on page 9. The authors state on page 9: “In addition to listing whole person impairments, the
musculoskeletal chapters provide regional impairment ratings (e.g. upper extremity, lower extremity);
regional ratings are then converted into whole person impairment ratings. Within some musculoskeletal
regions a consensus group developed weights to reflect the relative importance of certain regions. For
example, different fingers or different areas of the spine are given different weights, representing their
unique and relative importance to the region’s overall functioning. These weights, which have gained
acceptance in clinical practice, have been retained to enable regulatory authorities to convert from a
regional body to whole person impairment when needed.” Why this language was not included with Figure
15-19 and its cohorts for upper and lower extremity regions is totally speculative.
With this language from page 9 in mind, some physicians have justified their use of Figure 15-19 to
establish a more accurate WPI rating method than using the DRE or ROM methods. Remember, a
physician has to provide the strict rating first, then explain why the strict rating is not an accurate description
of the patient’s permanent impairment and disability and then the physician may utilize any alternative
rating method within the four corners of the Guides and state why that alternative method is the most
accurate and that the medical conclusions are based on reasonable medical probability.
The case law where a physician relied on Figure 15-19 are divided. The differences between the cases that
allowed use of Figure 15-19 and the cases that didn’t, boil down to how well the evaluating physician
explained why Figure 15-19 is the most accurate method. Suffice it to say that counsel should not rely on
the blind use of this method—it is really better used in failed back or neck fusion surgery cases, or in
multiple-level fusions of the cervical and lumbar spine.
Cases where Figure 15-19 was allowed on appeal to the Appeals Board include these noteworthy panel
decisions: Jimenez v. State of California /IHSS [2021 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 232]; Johnson v. City of
Los Angeles [2020 Cal. Work Comp, P.D. LEXIS 28]; Lemay v. JG Boswell Company [2020 Cal. Wrk.
Comp. P.D. LEXIS 36]; Espinoza v. Excel Staffing Services [2018 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 260];
Valladares v. JAM Ind. [2011 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 192]; Laury v. R&W Concrete [2011 Cal. Wrk.
Comp. P.D. LEXIS 77]. The Laury case has been cited numerous times in subsequent cases where the use
of Figure 15-19 was upheld on appeal to the Appeals Board. Cases where Figure 15-19 was not allowed
include: Porter v. Ridi Home Care, Inc. [2017 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 549]; Davis v. Walt Disney
Company [2014 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 52]; Graham v. Pepsi [2011 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS
368]; Leon v. RF Development & Busch Corp. [2011 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 123]; Wood v. U Haul
[2011 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 535].
These cited cases are noteworthy panel decisions published by LexisNexis but are not binding authority.
They are only persuasive authority. The differences between the cases where use of Figure 15-19 was
allowed and the cases where its use was not allowed, boil down to how well the evaluating physician
explained why the strict ratings of DRE and ROM do not accurately reflect the injured worker’s impairment
and disability. For example, it would not be unusual to use Figure 15-19 if there is a failed lumbar fusion
with a morphine pump or spinal stimulator. Experience has shown that those implanted devices lose their
effectiveness within five years, leaving an injured worker with very few options for pain relief and
improvement in spinal function.
Remember: the specific purpose of the lumbar spine is to hold up the torso and head of the person, to allow
for flexion, extension, lateral bending, sitting, standing, walking, bending, twisting of the torso, and engaging
in significant ADLs. The purpose of the cervical spine is to support the head and allow flexion, extension,
rotation of the head, and lateral bending of the neck. Most of these motions allow ADL functioning involving
our eyes, ears, nose, and mouth.
Page 17 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
Figure 15-19 should be used sparingly and only in cases where the physician can justify that the DRE and
ROM methods are not accurate and the use of Figure 15-19 is the most accurate rating method, including
consideration of other alternative methods that may be in other chapters of the Guides.
31. Did I rate a fractured rib case correctly?
The mechanism of injury is the first step to get to a final WPI rating. In this case, the injured worker is a
laborer whose job required him to gather empty cardboard boxes, unfold them and place them in a
compacter for recycling. On January 31, 2019, the compacter got clogged and the Applicant had to reach in
from a rail to unclog the machine using a dowel. While leaning towards the machine’s opening, he heard
and felt a crack in his ribs with the immediate onset of pain in his chest. The injury was reported, and he
was sent for treatment. X-rays revealed a fractured right anterior 9th rib. He was treated with anti-
inflammatory medications and a removable body brace. The Applicant complained during the one year of
subsequent treatment that his chest pain would increase with heavy breathing.
Upon reaching MMI one year later and with working modified work (no lifting over 15 pounds), a QME
opined that he still has residual difficulty from the right anterior rib fracture. At the time of his MMI
examination, the Applicant was 5’ 5” at 165 pounds. The QME stated: “Upon palpation of the thoracic spine,
there was exquisite tenderness over the ninth and tenth rib right side. There was tenderness in the thoracic
spine right-sided with mild muscle guarding and spasm. Pain was reported right-sided ninth and tenth rib.
Range of motion of the thoracic spine was normal at 50 degrees forward flexion and 30 degrees each for
left and right lateral rotation.” Despite the normal range of motion of the thoracic spine, the QME concluded
that the Applicant has a 6% WPI based on a DRE category II 6% WPI (range is 5% to 8% WPI) from Table
15-4, with no pain add-on and no apportionment to non-industrial factors. He justified this method of rating
because there was palpable muscle guarding and rigidity of the surrounding muscles along the thoracic
spine, which is consistent with a Category II thoracic spine impairment.
There is a great deal of debate over whether an orthopedic surgeon or a pulmonary specialist (internal
medicine PQME) is most qualified to determine an impairment rating from rib fractures. In this case, there
was only one rib fracture. In cases with multiple rib fractures, a person’s breathing capacity is severely
affected since the inspiration and expiration of air from the lungs requires expansion and contraction of the
rib case as the lungs fill and empty of air. In this case, there was no evaluation by an internist to see if the
Applicant’s breathing capacity was restricted due to the rib fracture, using Chapter 5 The Respiratory
System, as an additional WPI rating method. However, the 6% WPI for the thoracic spine impairment was
quite reasonable and constitutes substantial medical evidence since he explained how and why he chose
Table 15-4—the Applicant’s range of motion of the thoracic spine was not restricted due to the fracture.
However, there is also a common consequence of rib fractures in a condition called costochondritis wherein
there is inflammation of the cartilage between the ribs as a result of one or more ribs being fractured. This
is usually a permanent consequence of a rib fracture since scar tissue forms at the site of the fracture and
surrounding areas. This QME failed to discuss this issue as well as the fact that the Applicant had limited
range of motion of his right shoulder as a result of the rib fracture. In his MMI report, the QME failed to list
right shoulder range of motion measurements. People with healed rib fractures have difficulty with
abduction and adduction of the shoulder (125/180 degrees abduction in this case from a treating
physician’s prior report which is a 3% UE) on the side of the rib fracture. There usually is also an
impairment for adduction, but the QME did not indicate measurements of all six planes for shoulder range
of motion. He only noted the loss of abduction in a review of records of the treating physicians. The QME
did not indicate any other shoulder range of motion measurements by the treating physicians.
Therefore, in any rib fracture case, an evaluating physician should check the Applicant’s breathing capacity
(by ordering a pulmonary function test), determine a DRE rating of the thoracic spine, and any loss of range
of motion of the shoulder on the side(s) of the rib fracture(s) to obtain the most accurate ratings for rib
fractures.
32. I am not sure when I should apply a DRE II or a DRE III WPI rating for a lumbar spine impairment as
a general rule?
When a proposed settlement is presented to a judge for approval, the judge has to read the final physical
examination section and the MMI reporting of the treating and/or QME physicians. When a proposed
Page 18 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
settlement is presented that is based on a treating physician’s MMI report, if that report does not support
the settlement, the judge may order the parties to arrange for a QME evaluation under Labor Code
§ 4062.1 for unrepresented injured workers and Labor Code § 4062.2 for represented ones. In this case, a
31-year-old construction worker injured his lumbar spine in January 2018, with an MMI exam by the treating
physician in May of 2019. The treating physician’s MMI report indicates the mechanism of injury as follows:
“The employee reported pain after work yesterday in low back which got worse this morning.”
In this case, at the MMI examination, the treating physician described the objective findings: “MRI shows at
L4-L5 mild t moderate spinal canal stenosis and moderate bilateral neural foraminal stenosis. There is a 6
mm central to right paracentral disc protrusion with compression of the descending right L5 nerve and a
posterior annular fissure at L4-L5…the patient has clinically significant lumbar radiculopathy to the right
lower extremity. He also has a lumbar spine MRI showing a herniated disc causing compression of the right
L5 nerve root. Consequently he is a DRE category II that calculates as a 7% WPI.”
So this physician failed to clearly state what exactly the mechanism of injury was—is this a specific injury or
a cumulative trauma injury? A Stipulations With Request for Award based on the 7% WPI DRE II rating was
rejected by a judge. The reason is that this injured worker clearly falls under a DRE category III since he
has a herniated disc with continuing radiculopathy that is documented in this physician’s report. In addition,
he has a torn annulus which can cause symptoms by itself. Since his straight leg raising tests were
negative, a low-end DRE Category III rating of 10% WPI would have been more accurate in this case
based on the MRI and the Applicant’s residual symptoms. It is important to note that the Applicant was
placed on prednisone for a length of time which is a strong steroid that reduces swelling and actually was
effective in reducing the radicular symptoms this employee had since the injury. The case was ordered to a
panel QME under the unrepresented track, and the case was settled based on a DRE Category III 10%
WPI.
33. Is California going to use DSM-5, which does not have a GAF rating? The standard has been DSM-IV
TR, which is multiaxial and includes the GAF in section V.
This is a great question. In Guzman III, the Court of Appeal indicated that a physician may refer to current
research on medical conditions and adopt the latest diagnostic criteria for a medical condition that has
reached maximum medical improvement. A physician is not required to use the diagnostic criteria in the
AMA Guides 5th Edition or in earlier editions of the DSM because they may be obsolete. Remember, the
5th Edition of the Guides was published in 2000, the DSM-IV TR was published at about the same time, but
the DSM-5 was published in May 2013. Medical research has been updated significantly. For example, the
diagnostic criteria for PTSD has changed due to extensive research since 2000. So you should use the
DSM-5 for diagnostic criteria for all psychiatric conditions, but due to the Permanent Disability Rating
Schedule, you are required to assign a GAF score from the DSM-IV TR and associated WPI rating.
34. Can a QME treating physician who writes the QME report assign another QME physician to do the
evaluation? Is such a report admissible?
In a specific case, a doctor is either the primary treating physician, a secondary treating physician, or a
medical-legal evaluator as a QME or AME. This question confuses the role of each. Labor Code § 4628
requires the QME to perform the examination of the patient and cannot be delegated to another doctor. If a
treating physician wants to have another doctor perform the MMI evaluation, the report probably will not
carry any evidentiary weight since the physician who wrote the report was not the treating physician. A
consultative physician brought in to the case by a primary treating physician to do the MMI evaluation is
suspicious, and probably will not be given any weight by a judge.
35. Regarding range of motion method of rating the spine in the 5th Edition: In the 6th Edition, they
state “Range of motion is no longer used as a basis for rating impairment, since current evidence
does not support this as a reliable indicator of specific pathology or permanent functional status.”
p 558. For reasons like this, I sometimes look to the 6th Edition for information.
It is impermissible for a physician to consult with another edition of the AMA Guides in order to determine
impairment ratings. The physician can use more recent diagnostic criteria for the medical condition, but the
impairment evaluation must be consistent with the “descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides 5th
Page 19 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
Edition” as mandated by Labor Code §§ 4660 and 4660.1. If a physician uses the 6th Edition of the AMA
Guides for a medical-legal examination in California, the report will not be admissible, the physician will not
get paid, and the QME may be subject to discipline by the DWC Medical Unit. See Labor Code
§ 139.2(d)(2) and 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10683.
36. There is another statute or regulation (which I can’t find right now) that mandates that psychiatric
disability ratings are made using the GAF scale of DSM IV, not the AMA Guides.  Yes? And can you
cite this regulation? Thanks.
Labor Code § 3208.3(a) states in pertinent part: “A psychiatric injury shall be compensable if it is a mental
disorder … and it is diagnosed [under section 139.2(j)(4)] or, is diagnosed using the terminology and criteria
of the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third
Edition-Revised, or the terminology and diagnostic criteria of other psychiatric diagnostic manuals generally
approved and accepted nationally by practitioners in the field of psychiatric medicine.” Labor Code
§ 139.2(j)(4) states the same wording as quoted above after the word “or.”  So the rating of permanent
psychiatric disability is to be used under the 2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule, which is
promulgated by the Administrative Director of the Division of Workers’ Compensation under Labor Code
§§ 4660, 4660.1, and 5307.3. That regulation adopts the GAF conversion to WPI rubric.
37. You mentioned not relying on computer based scoring. For psyche, it is standard, but is it advisable
to use computer based scoring of tests, but human (doctor) based interpretation?
I agree with that but always remember that an attorney cannot cross-examine a computer. So the physician
should always be prepared to provide a clear description of the testing, how it was scored, and the
significance of the results.
38. Why is the job analysis or job description not provided anymore?
As of the end of 2009, vocational rehabilitation benefits ended and were replaced by a Supplemental Job
Displacement Voucher for any injured worker who was not provided with regular, modified, or alternative
work when their medical condition was MMI. The old vocational rehabilitation statute required a job analysis
to assist the physicians to determine QIW status—whether the injured worker was a Qualified Injured
Worker entitled to up to $16,000 in retraining expenses. Today, a job analysis is sometimes requested in
order to clarify the arduousness of a job that was being performed at the time of an industrial injury, but
getting a formal job analysis is rare. Every treating physician and QME/AME must complete and attach to
their MMI report a form DWC-AD 10133.36 “Physician’s Return To Work & Voucher Report.”
39. If a QME does not use RFA for say MRI needed, how do we “order” the study other then stating in
our report?
Do not use an RFA for a diagnostic study if you are a QME or AME. RFAs are only required for treating
physicians under Labor Code § 4610(b) and not for medical-legal evaluators. Requests for diagnostic
studies by a medical-legal evaluator are not subject to utilization reviews or independent medical reviews.
They are subject to Labor Code § 4620(a) to prove or disprove a contested claim. Best practices of claims
administrators and defense attorneys is to notify a QME or AME in a cover letter that diagnostic studies can
be reasonably ordered at the expense of the employer or claims administrator, except for tests that require
hospitalization which would require advanced authorization or agreement between the parties. Remember,
diagnostic studies are subject to a fee schedule. See 8 Cal. Code Reg. §§ 9793(h) and 9794(a) that adopt a
medical-legal fee schedule for diagnostic studies.  So pay attention to any cover letter that states you are
authorized to order testing and, if not, then you should state in your report why you ordered them.
40. In internal medicine, 100% of the time, either (1) the claimant has additional body part issues than
listed in the cover letter, or (2) the applicant cover letter has thrown in every possible body part, but
when you ask the claimant, there are no complaints in some of them. This means that you could do
an entire full body exam in every case. Thoughts?
You need to perform a thorough physical examination of the claimant (called Applicant), paying attention to
the DWC-1 Claim form and the Application(s) for Adjudication of Claim. Those are the legal documents that
form the basis of the employee’s claim, including whether the claim is for a specific injury or cumulative
Page 20 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
trauma injury. The parts of body alleged should be articulated in each Application for each separate injury.
As a physician, you have a duty to address all parts of body claimed in each Application or Amended
Application for each date of injury. Many times, parts of body alleged are what some people call “attorney
created body parts,” and when the medical-legal physician asks the Applicant about what parts of body are
being claimed, many times parts of body alleged by an attorney are not mentioned by the Applicant.
No, you do not need to perform a “full body exam,” but you should be aware of what the Applicant is
claiming, and provide the parties with detailed signs, symptoms, and complaints that the Applicant
attributes to their work injury. If you make an incidental finding—say, for example, you diagnose an
abdominal hernia and the claim is for hypertension—then, you indicate in your physical examination that
there is a palpable defect indicative of a hernia, and you make your findings about the claimed
hypertension.  It is up to the Applicant’s attorney to amend the Application to allege the hernia. Your duty is
to make and disclose an incidental finding on exam.
41. I got significant pushback from the defense attorney in a deposition after examining and providing a
WPI on a body part that was not listed in the claim. In retrospect, should I have just stated there are
additional complaints and exam findings and not provided the WPI? And then let the applicant’s
attorney file a separate claim?
That is an excellent question. It is in your discretion to indicate involvement of a body part or system that
was not alleged in the claim but was part of your findings on exam. We have seen cases where a right knee
injury is accepted, but the Applicant complains of bilateral knee pain at the time of a medical-legal exam
where the other knee was not included in the claim. Since the left knee complaints could be a compensable
consequence of the right knee injury, you have an affirmative duty to mention it in your physical findings
and report. Whether the knee condition is MMI is another question, and you have to see if there is any
ratable impairment of the unmentioned body part or system. Certainly, you must mention your findings in
your report and leave out any WPI rating if you want—it would be helpful for you to mention that the other
body part was not mentioned in the claim, and you want further guidance from the parties as to whether to
address it. The parties may ask you for a supplemental report to provide the WPI rating and comment on
apportionment. This is good cause for a supplemental report on a body part that is an incidental finding.
42. What does “highest” WPI rating in psyche cases mean?
Your question is a bit vague, but the response is that when the psychologist or psychiatrist rates WPI in a
psyche case, you obtain the diagnosis from the DSM-5 and follow the rubric in the DSM-IV TR [and in the
Permanent Disability Rating Schedule pages 1-12 through 1-16] to establish a GAF score based on your
clinical assessment of the Applicant that accurately evaluates their personal, social, and occupational
functioning at the time of MMI and what WPI rating is associated with that GAF score.
43. It was made explicit to us as QMEs that we are not allowed to comment on medical treatment that
has already been denied under utilization review or independent medical review. For example, if we
feel a knee replacement is needed, but the treating physician already requested authorization and a
knee replacement was denied prior to QME. Isn’t this treatment already denied by non-med-legal
and thus we are not allowed to comment (different then say MRI needed for rating purposes)?
It is not that simple a prohibition for a medical-legal physician to comment on the current and future need
for medical treatment. In fact, 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10682(b)(10) says: “Medical reports should include where
applicable … (10) Treatment indicated, including past, continuing, and future medical care.” So a medical-
legal physician must comment on medical treatment, which as indicated in the program could create a
change in circumstances for a primary treating physician to issue another request for authorization for a
medical procedure that was denied less than a year before the QME or AME exam.
44. Pain add-on in psyche cases is not justified because causation takes place entirely within the
“psyche” (i.e., “mind”) of the injured worker; therefore, the pain has already been accounted for.
Yes?
You are correct—a physician cannot issue a 1% to 3% WPI pain add-on to a WPI that was based on a GAF
score. Besides, the DSM-5 has a pain disorder based on with or without tissue damage within the
Page 21 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
diagnostic criteria of Somatic Related Disorders. So a psyche impairment rating already would include a
pain-related WPI rating.
45. Can you add a 1–5% for tinnitus if there is a 0% hearing impairment? Many times the tinnitus is the
main symptom.
Despite what the AMA Guides say, there does not have to be a hearing loss in order to provide a WPI
impairment rating for tinnitus. Page 246, section 11.2a of the AMA Guides does say there has to be a
ratable hearing loss in order to rate tinnitus, but most ENT physicians will rate tinnitus up to 5% WPI if the
tinnitus affects a person’s ADLs, even in the absence of measureable hearing loss. The reason is that
tinnitus does distract a sufferer from hearing on the side that is affected by the tinnitus during a severe
episode. Plus, under the Guzman case, a physician can deviate from a strict rating and provide an
alternative rating if one is more accurate.
46. In Chapter 12, there is a section allowing up to 15% impairment for Individual Adjustment for
conditions such as photophobia, glare sensitivity, or other measurable visual symptoms. How can
we “show our work” when it is left to us to decide how much to assign as an impairment? It is
entirely subjective without any objective measurements available for these type of symptoms.
See the answer above for tinnitus! Since these conditions are listed in the AMA Guides in Chapter 12, it is
reasonable for an ophthalmologist to rate these conditions as long as in their professional opinion the
complaints are legitimate and affect the Applicant’s ADLs.
47. On page 380, Sec. 15.2a, Number 4 outlines the specific requirements when the ROM method
instead of DRE should be used.
Yes, but the AMA Guides do not anticipate a cumulative trauma injury as being “an injury” referenced in the
text on pages 379-381. The best practices by physicians in determining a spinal impairment is to assess
both DRE and ROM, and tell the judge in your report which method is the most accurate and why. Once
you accomplish that, you can utilize the Guzman analysis to determine the most accurate WPI rating in the
case. One glaring example of inconsistencies in the Guides is that, in the text on pages 379-381, the
authors state that there has to be a radiculopathy for the ROM method to be justified. However, in Table 15-
7 on page 404, under category IIC, a ROM rating is tified when there is a “herniated nucleus pulposus with
or without radiculopathy.”
48. Lumbar ROM is often difficult because the injured worker is guarded and complains of pain. Please
advise.
Yes, and you should refer to Box 15-1 [pages 382–383] that gives you the diagnostic testing criteria that
should be performed on examination of a spinal condition to place a patient into a DRE category. The
description of “muscle guarding” is a good start. Also, bear in mind that in other medical-legal settings—
social security disability evaluations to be specific—the straight leg raise [both supine and sitting] are a very
strong and reliable testing to determine sciatic pain, which makes a difference in our context between a
DRE-II and DRE-III WPI rating. You also are advised that the instructions in Chapter 2 of the AMA Guides
include having the injured worker perform three warm-ups before you actually measure ROM.
49. Why doesn’t ACOEM and AAOS [American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons] accept CT as
explanation for injury?
This is simply because only nine states recognize cumulative trauma injuries. ACOEM is headed by
occupational medicine physicians, and the leadership is mindful of the economic and political
considerations when states adopt a broader definition of an “industrial injury.” AAOS does not have a dog in
the fight over the politics of medicine in the context of whether a state recognizes cumulative trauma. There
is also limited empirical data that support the existence of cumulative trauma injuries: working with a
jackhammer vs. typing on a computer keyboard. However, in California, causation of injury is very liberal,
and the threshold of proof of causation of an industrial injury is that work activities contributed to a
diagnosis.
50. A recent meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials showed no advantage to distal clavicle
excision in patients undergoing a rotator cuff repair, even in the presence of acromioclavicular joint
Page 22 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
arthritis. Yet, you stated that a 15% whole person impairment may be more appropriate than a 6%
whole person impairment for a procedure that seems not to be medically indicated. So evidence-
based medicine would conclude that the excision of the distal clavicle done in conjunction of a
rotator cuff tear plays no role in activities of daily living. Should not evidence-based medicine be
considered in our analysis, or is the goal to maximize the impairment rating?
The point is that the 15% WPI should apply when both sides of the AC joint is excised—by way of a distal
clavicle resection arthroplasty coupled with a sub-acromion decompression. The WPI ratings assigned to
the upper extremity joints in Table 16-18 and for resection arthroplasties in Table 16-27 are not derived
from any evidence-based medicine. The WPI ratings in the entire AMA Guides are “consensus derived” and
are not based on any clinical research, epidemiological studies, or empirical evidence. No WPI ratings are
based on evidence-based medicine. This physician must understand that the AMA Guides are based on no
research at all, and are written by occupational medicine experts who consulted with specialists in other
areas of medicine. Physicians are urged to read Chapters 1 and 2 at least once a year to understand the
basis of the Guides and to apply them in accordance with California law.
51. With respect to the lack of accommodation of modified duty restriction, is there a default of TD or
TPD?
If the patient is not MMI, then their status is either temporary total disability, which means they cannot work
at all; or, if the patient is able to work fewer hours than their pre-injury hours, then they are able to receive
temporary partial disability benefits.
52. You mentioned the need to have impairment of some sort before giving 1–3% pain add on … If you
invoke Almaraz-Guzman and don’t feel that impairment can be rated any other way, can you give
pain add on in that circumstance? (e.g., tendonitis case with normal range of motion, etc., but you
feel that the pain itself is causing some degree of impairment).
Most judges will not award permanent disability if the only ratable impairment is a pain add-on. Your report
will not constitute substantial medical evidence, and you will either be asked to explain your conclusions in
a supplemental report or the judge will conclude you are missing something that is ratable, resulting in
possibly the appointment of a new medical-legal physician. For example, in a tendonitis case, you can rate
sensory and motor deficits using Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15 by using “sensory deficits or pain” in
Table 16-10, and giving it a Grade 4 for the median or ulnar nerve for the wrist or elbow, respectively. This
would hold up as a strict rating, even if the symptoms are intermittent, as long as you explain the rationale
of your conclusions.
53. I am an internal medicine QME. Pulmonary embolism is a potentially fatal condition, the use of
anticoagulants significantly affects ADL (more than 3% add on), and there is no table that
addresses that. AMA Guides Table 4-6 needs high pulmonary pressures to get any WPI. How do I
address it?
Actually, the answer to your question is not in a table but in the text. On page 203 of the Guides, the
authors state that anyone who is taking an anticoagulant should avoid activities that might lead to trauma.
They go on to state: “Impairment of the whole person with acquired blood clotting defects is estimated at
0% to 10% WPI.” This is consistent with the criteria in Table 9-4 on page 203 for impairments due to
hemorrhagic and platelet disorders, even if that disorder is caused by prescribed medication. This is a great
question and points to the fact that some impairment ratings that the authors of the AMA Guides describe
are not in a table or chart but are hidden in plain sight in the text.
54. What do you do for a patient who puts in a claim after they were terminated from a job and then the
applicant’s attorney sends the patient to a doctor, and the patient has many problems and sent for
PT, acupuncture, and it goes on?
Our economy ebbs and flows, with a great recession in 2007–2008, periodic times of high employment,
high unemployment, the temporary unemployment rates during the pandemic, and many other events that
only economists can explain to us mortals. Sure, there are frivolous cases filed by some unscrupulous
attorneys. The politics reflect the friction between labor and management. However, many post-termination
cases are very real and very legitimate. Your job as physicians is to stay out of the politics and tell the judge
Page 23 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
assigned to the case if the patient has objective medical diagnoses and if they are or are not work related.
In fact, defense attorneys should not even tell you a claim is post termination—that is a legal defense under
Labor Code § 3600(a)(10). But the Applicant has the burden of proving injury AOE/COE first, and it is your
job as QMEs and AMEs to ignore legal defenses to a claim and to see if you are dealing with an injured
worker. You decide the medical-legal issues, and the judge decides if the post termination claim is barred
as an affirmative defense. In other words, stay out of it!
55. What, when, where, and how are easy. What does “why” actually mean?
The “why” of your medical-legal conclusions refer to the rationale of your conclusions. You must tell us the
basis of your conclusions and not just your conclusions. Tell us the reasoning behind your conclusions—
follow the rubric: “If A equals B, and B equals C, A equals C” type of reasoning.
56. Should I address Kite in every case?
No, not in every case. You should address Kite [Athens Administrators v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(2013) 78 Cal. Comp. Cases 213 (writ den.) (Kite)] if a party requests that you comment on whether it
applies in the case before you. The Applicant has the burden of proving permanent disability, so they have
the duty to raise the issue. However, on the other hand you have a duty to provide the parties with the most
accurate WPI ratings. If you believe the CVC should not apply, and the WPI ratings should be added, you
can do so on your own without being asked, if adding the WPI ratings result in the most accurate
determination of the Applicant’s impairments.
57. Does “why” refer to the MD making a decision or the applicant developing a disease?
See the answer to Question 24. The “why” refers to the rationale of your conclusions about disputed
medical issues relevant to a medical-legal examination in accordance with Labor Code § 4062.3(a). This
includes your conclusions about causation of injury, permanent disability, period(s) of temporary total
disability, apportionment—all of the medical-legal issues listed in 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10682.
58. If an applicant has gone to a chiropractor for low back pain prior to the acute injury, it is not
necessarily related to any pre-existing degenerative disc disease found on a subsequent MRI—low
back pain is often muscle strain from repetitive lifting or acute strain that lingers. Could you use
this reasoning to deny apportionment in an acute low back injury?
Of course, you can, but is there also a cumulative trauma injury? Did you review the prior chiropractor’s
records? Did the chiropractor document “muscle strain from repetitive lifting?” If so, the Applicant probably
has a cumulative trauma claim with or without a positive MRI. If diagnostic studies are sub-clinical, you may
squeeze by with a DRE Category II WPI rating if you justify it by describing the effects of the condition on
the Applicant’s ADLs and work functioning.
59. Under Labor Code § 4660.1, can a QME request a separate psychological evaluation in order to have
this included in the permanent disability?
Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(2) prohibits permanent disability for a psychiatric condition that is caused by a
physical injury unless the injury was the result of a violent act or from a catastrophic injury. The
determination of whether an injury was the result of a violent act or catastrophic injury is a question of fact
to be determined by a judge. You can request a QME in psychology or psychiatry if you believe the
Applicant has a mental disorder that may be caused by an industrial injury. The WCAB will allow a QME
examination in psychiatry or psychology in order to determine if the injured worker is entitled to medical
treatment and temporary disability on an industrial basis due to a psyche condition that is a result of a
physical injury. The question of whether the Applicant is entitled to permanent disability depends on a
finding of a violent act or catastrophic injury or that it is due to cumulative trauma psychiatric stress.
60. What do the judges think of the AME receiving redacted medical records to avoid charges under the
new Medical-Legal Fee Schedule?
If the doctor wants to review an un-redacted copy of medical records, the physician should say so in the
medical-legal report and request the parties to send a full set.
Page 24 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
61. My perspective on internal injuries is that doing an appropriate physical examination and
commenting on observed abnormalities is appropriate, even if a diagnosis is not explicitly
mentioned in the cover letters. What do you advise?
As stated in this group of questions, if the examining physician finds a medical condition that is not listed in
the claim or Application, the physician has a duty to disclose the medical findings in the report and indicate
if the condition is related to the claimed industrial injury or injuries, or that further medical record review is
necessary.
62. If the defense attorney is redacting records, who is doing it, what are their qualifications, what
criteria are they using, and can arbitrarily redacted medical records be sufficient to provide
substantial medical evidence? For complex cases like Chavira [Chavira v. Southland Granite, Inc.
(2022) 87 Cal. Comp. Cases 62, 2021 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 270 (Board Panel Decision)], this
to me is a huge issue. I just completed a case where the defense attorney did a haphazard medical
redaction for a complex internal medicine case, which made the medical records review
unintelligible. This will cause endless delays in the resolution of this claim.
If this happens in a case, the physician should request the parties to send an un-redacted set of records for
the medical-legal physician’s review. Best practices is to have the Applicant and Defense attorneys agree
on what is being sent to the evaluator or for a judge to order what is being sent for review. Parties should
review records and eliminate duplicative records.
63. You require that the doctor must state who measures the blood pressure—a trivial matter.
Actually, who measures an Applicant’s blood pressure is not a trivial matter. Blood pressure can be ratable
under Table 4-2 of the AMA Guides using the American Heart Association Hypertension guidelines that
went into effect in November 2017. Accordingly, if a nurse or medical assistant measures elevated blood
pressure at the initial exam, the QME or AME should follow up with their own measurements.
64. When the defense attorney redacts medical records, who does it? How it is done is not disclosed.
That is a huge disconnect for me.
When a party redacts medical records, opposing counsel has a duty to challenge that redaction. If the
opposing counsel fails to do so, the medical-legal evaluator should review what is sent and rely on those
records for their conclusions. However, if the evaluating physician believes the records are incomplete, then
a request should be made in the medical-legal report that a full set of records be sent for a thorough review.
65. Patients generally have a concussion, spinal injury, or a chronic pain injury, that then causes a
sleep disorder. The sleep disorder’s cognitive effects can be confirmed through objective testing,
such as neuropsychological testing or cognitive testing.
Yes, but permanent disability for a sleep disorder as a result of a physical injury is not allowed if the date of
injury is on or after 1/1/2013 and the injury is not catastrophic or as a result from a violent act. There may
be the argument that includes sleep disorders as part of a brain injury and, thus, can be rated under a
catastrophic injury since sleep disorders are a psychiatric condition and are in the DSM.
66. Regarding Chavira there are recent panel decisions Bradley [Bradley v. State of California, 2022 Cal.
Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 26 (Board Panel Decision)] and Martinez [Martinez v. Sousa Tire service,
2022 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 70 (Board Panel Decision)] that determined a different specialty,
such as psyche, cannot opine adding permanent impairments under one specialty to those of
another specialty. This is very confusing for evaluators.
It is safe to say that a QME or AME can apply adding impairments instead of combining them within their
own medical specialty, but adding impairments between medical specialties probably will not constitute
substantial medical evidence. Judges would be troubled by the rationale for a doctor in one specialty
opining that adding impairments with those from other areas of medical specialties are based on substantial
medical evidence. Drawing conclusions involving a specialty that is not within that doctor’s sphere of
knowledge, skills, and training would be speculative. It would be easier if a psychiatrist or internal medicine
QME or AME opines that they cannot apportion permanent disability between separate injuries under
Benson, which also has an additive effect for multiple impairment ratings for the separate injuries.
Page 25 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
Remember, the Applicant has the burden of proof of permanent disability, so they would have to raise the
issue of rebutting application of the Combined Values Chart and have any medical-legal evaluator conclude
that the impairments within their specialty are additive. In both the Bradley and Martinez cases, the Appeals
Board rejected adding of WPI ratings from different specialties as being outside the expertise of the doctor
who opined the ratings from his and other specialists should be added and the combined values chart
should not apply. See also Valdez v. Orange County Fire Authority [2022 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 100
(Board Panel Decision)].
67. Will the state of California drop the use of the Green Book and adopt the Brown Book (6th Edition)
anytime soon?
For California to adopt any other edition of the AMA Guides would take legislative action and approval by
the Governor since Labor Code §§ 4660 and 4660.1 mandate the use of the AMA Guides 5th Edition. Many
states that adopted the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides passed regulations or laws to move away from them,
which is why the AMA is in the process of revising the 6th Edition. In addition, the State of Pennsylvania
Supreme Court declared the state’s use of the AMA Guides 6th Edition was unconstitutional because
adoption of them were not mandated by state law or regulation and was determined by a medical
association rather than a publically vetted mandate. The employer and risk management community in
California have been economically satisfied with our adoption of the AMA Guides 5th Edition, and there is
no movement afoot to change that.
68. Sleep disorders are a psychiatric diagnosis, but there are additional sleep disorders in play, such as
central apnea aggravated by narcotics, and obstructive sleep apnea aggravated by industrial
derived weight gain. Can the psyche rate the psychiatric sleep disorder and the internist separately
rate the internal medicine sleep disorder?
Yes, and counsel for the Applicant would contend that the exclusion for permanent disability due to sleep
disorders would not apply when there is a bio-mechanical or bio-physiological cause of the sleep disorder.
There would be ratings for the central apnea (directly brain related) and obstructive sleep apnea (in the
upper airway) that could avoid the Labor Code § 4660.1 restriction. Having an internist rate an apnea
related sleep disorder is problematic, and it would be suggested that the psychiatrist and internist work out
who rates the sleep disorder and indicate why it should be exempt from the limitation in Labor Code
§ 4660.1.
69. Can we start considering new criteria from the new DSM-5-TR that is out now? [Other related
question: What does DSM-5 stand for?]
Yes, as stated in an earlier question above, psychiatrists and psychologists can use the most recent edition
of the DSM adopted by the American Psychiatric Association, which has been widely used by practicing
psychiatrists in the State of California. DSM-5 stands for “Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-Version 5.” The
first DSM was issued by a group of psychiatrists in the early 1900s and was revised a number of times with
complete revisions occurring five times due to advances in psychiatric medicine research.
70. I am an occupational medicine physician, and have frequently seen psyche injuries along with
physical injuries where the physical injury was not “catastrophic” but definitely may have caused a
psyche injury that was significant. Can you advise how to obtain psyche QME? (For instance, bus
driver attacked by passenger that caused continued anxiety in driving a bus.)
Your example is a classic one that is an exception to the limitation of Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(2). The bus
operator was a victim of a violent act which, by statute and case law, is an exception to that limitation, and
they would be able to obtain permanent disability benefits on account of the psychiatric component of their
claim. A party can obtain a psyche QME just to find out if a DSM diagnosis is work related because the
injured worker would be entitled to temporary total disability and medical treatment on an industrial basis for
the psychiatric condition; they would just not be entitled to permanent disability benefits if the psyche
condition is derivative of a physical injury that is not from a violent act.
71. How does the Justice decision affect compensable consequence?
Page 26 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
The Justice case has nothing to do with compensable consequential injuries from an accepted industrial
injury. Employers still have liability for compensable consequential injuries. The Justice case involves a
question of whether pre-existing degenerative joint disease in the knees can be apportioned when the
pathology was surgically removed due to knee replacements. The Court of Appeal held that the pre-existing
arthritis was an “indirect” cause of the Applicant’s permanent disability even though it had been surgically
removed. See County of Santa Clara v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Justice) [(2020) 49 Cal. App. 5th
605, 85 Cal. Comp. Cases 467].
72. Per Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(2): Is the “violent act” exception limited to things like assaults, or would
it also cover, e.g., a prefabricated wall falling on the applicant?
The violent act exception is not limited to assaults. In Larsen v. Securitas Security Services, Inc. (2016) 81
Cal. Comp. Cases 770 (writ denied), the Appeals Board panel found that getting hit by a car was a “violent
act” and fell under the exception described by Labor Code § 4660.1(c)(2). So it is not a stretch of the
imagination that a wall suddenly falling on a worker is also a “violent act,” but judges may differ in their
interpretation and application of a statute.
73. DSM-5 on page 16 states that the GAF score should not be used with DSM-5. DSM-5 TR is just
belong released, and I am not sure how the GAF will be treated in this new release. Therefore, to
use the GAF, we should continue to use DSM-IV TR.
The DSM-5, and any update of it, is relevant to current research on the diagnosis of mental conditions. The
American Psychiatric Association concluded in May 2013 in the DSM-5 that the GAF scores in the DSM-IV
and DSM-IV TR are obsolete and are unreliable predictors of a person’s long-term prognosis or disability.
However, the 2005 California Permanent Disability Rating Schedule (PDRS) adopted the GAF-WPI rubric
and, until the PDRS is updated, all of us are bound by its use. Since the diagnostic criteria for mental
conditions have been updated in clinical research, the DSM-5 and future revisions of the DSM should be
used to diagnose a psychiatric condition.
74. My understanding is that not every psychiatric impairment needs Rolda analysis of percentages of
employment events. Only psychiatric impairments that are caused at least 35 to 40% by personnel
actions would require Rolda analysis. Please comment.
Your statement is totally incorrect. Any and all psychiatric claims, even for treatment or temporary total
disability indemnity, are subject to a Rolda analysis. This physician needs to attend a program that
specifically addresses how psychiatric claims are handled from a medical-legal standpoint. Part of that
analysis says that if the evaluating or treating physician opines that a DSM diagnosis is “substantially
caused” or 35%–40% by lawful, good-faith, non-discriminatory personnel actions [see Lab. Code
§ 3208.3(h)], then the psychiatric condition is not compensable. That is just part of the Rolda puzzle.
75. Why was the Ruffalo case even accepted in the first place? Did the QME in Ruffalo understand the
four-part test that constitutes a Rolda analysis? If so, how did he break it down?
Liability for the alleged psychiatric injury was not accepted in the first place. The Appeals Board reiterated
the Rolda analysis in this case. The medical-legal evaluator or PTP must make the following
determinations, along with a judge:
1. Were there actual events of employment that caused a DSM diagnosis?
2. Were any of the actual events of employment personnel actions?
3. Were the personnel actions lawful, non-discriminatory and in good faith?
4. If the personnel actions were lawful, non-discriminatory and in good faith, did they substantially cause the
DSM diagnosis? Substantial cause is equal to 35–40%.
The doctor has to explain if “actual events of employment” are a manifestation of the Applicant’s imagination
and part of a psychiatric pathology, e.g., from hallucinations. In addition, the evaluator has to break down each
“actual event of employment,” including personnel actions, whether in good faith or not, into percentages of
causation of a DSM diagnosis. A good template would look like this:
____ % DSM Diagnosis caused by Personnel Action #1 (e.g.. getting fired)
Page 27 of 27
§ 6.04 Questions Doctors Ask Us
____ % DSM Diagnosis caused by Personnel Action #2 (e.g., falsely accused of theft)
____ % DSM Diagnosis caused by Personnel Action #3 (e.g., being written up for incompetence)
____ % DSM Diagnosis caused by non-industrial factors (specify: e.g., death of family member)
____ % DSM Diagnosis caused by daily stress of performing duties at work
= 100%
The judge would decide what were actual events of employment and whether any of them were personnel
actions and, if so, if in good faith, etc. This analysis is only to determine causation of a psychiatric condition and
is not used to determine causation of permanent psychiatric disability. Permanent psychiatric disability is
determined when the Applicant is MMI by the GAF score that corresponds with a WPI rating under the
Permanent Disability Rating Schedule.
76. Under what circumstances is a defense attorney barred from sharing sub-rosa video files with the
evaluator?
This may occur if a judge prohibits surveillance video from being shown to a medical-legal evaluator if, after
an in camera hearing (or private hearing), the subject in the video is not the Applicant, for example. In a
rare case, surveillance video may not be allowed if the investigator obtained the video illegally. In the
experience of this instructor, in 40 years of his Applicant’s law practice, surveillance video was detrimental
to less than 5 cases. Most surveillance video is useless and will not change the outcome of a claim.
However, sometimes, video surveillance will uncover a fraudulent claim. This is because under the AMA
Guides a finding of permanent impairment requires permanent objective medical findings to justify an
impairment rating. Many people who may have a ratable WPI impairment under the Guides may not be
disabled.
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp CHAPTER 7.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
CHAPTER 7 Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.01  Overview
§ 7.02  Direct and Cross Examination of Applicants
[1]  Introduction
[2]  Applicant’s Deposition
[a]  General Categories of Questions
[b]  Checklist of Questions in an AMA Guides Case
[3]  Other Deposition and Trial Considerations
§ 7.03  Direct and Cross Examination of Physicians
[1]  Introduction
[2]  Checklist of Questions in an AMA Guides Case
§ 7.04  Medical Questions on Pathology
§ 7.05  Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
[1]  Whether Extrinsic Evidence Is Allowed
[2]  Proper Foundation Needed for Expert Testimony
[3]  Vocational Expert Testimony
[4]  Evidence of Loss of Future Earning Capacity
[5]  Costs of Expert Testimony and Vocational Testing
[6]  Procedural Considerations
§ 7.06  Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
[1]  Introduction
[a]  Current Law
[b]  Historical Perspective
Page 2 of 3
Synopsis to CHAPTER 7 : Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
[2]  Factual Background
[a]  Almaraz
[b]  Guzman
[c]  Ogilvie
[d]  Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) or “Guzman III”
[3]  Ogilvie III
[a]  Effect of SB 863
[b]  2005 PDRS
[c]  Ogilvie Glossary
[4]  Practice Tips
§ 7.07  Rebutting a WPI Rating—Post-Almaraz-Guzman III
§ 7.08  Rebutting a Strict Impairment Rating Based on the AMA Guides
[1]  Introduction
[2]  Grounds for Rebuttal
§ 7.09  Example #1: Lower Extremity Cases and Table 17-2, The Cross-Usage Chart
§ 7.10  Example #2: Ferras v. United Airlines—Adductor Tendon Tear
§ 7.11  Example #3: Four Objective Findings, But Only One Ratable Impairment—Knee Injury
§ 7.12  Example #4: Rotator Cuff Tears, Shoulder Impingement Cases, Elbows, Any Upper Extremity Joint
Involvement
§ 7.13  Example #5: Fractured Elbow With Avascular Necrosis and Contracture
§ 7.14  Example #6: Injured Worker Has Lost Significant Function in One or Both Upper Extremities Due to
Multiple Impairments
§ 7.15  Example #7: Carpal Tunnel Syndrome as the Only Diagnosis
§ 7.16  Example #8: Muscle Strength Loss, Loss of Motion and Resection Arthroplasty for Shoulder
§ 7.17  Example #9: Various Ways to Rebut Strict Spinal Impairment Ratings
§ 7.18  Example #10: Reactive Airway Disease as a Result of Exposure to Fumes
§ 7.19  Example #11: Recurrent Back Sprains
§ 7.20  Example #12: Carpenter’s Close Encounter With Table Saw
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 3 of 3
Synopsis to CHAPTER 7 : Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.01
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.01 Overview
This chapter has been revised to reflect the impact recent case law has had on the workers’ compensation system
and the determination of permanent impairment and permanent disability ratings. The gist of every case is the
development of the record and the evaluation of evidence by the parties, judges, the WCAB and appellate courts.
This chapter assists you in the development and evaluation of lay, expert and medical evidence that drives a
workers’ compensation claim from injury through resolution. As in every injury, the development of the record
begins with the injured worker and his or her personal history. Then we move on to the treating and evaluating
physicians or other experts with a review of their reports and possible deposition testimony. Finally, we put
everything together, analyze the case and bring the claim to some kind of resolution—settlement or trial.
This chapter integrates consideration of evidence to be presented at trial or as a basis for settlement discussions
based on three separate but overlapping systems to include cases that fall under the 1997 PDRS, 2005 PDRS, and
the 2013 PDRS as a result of the enactment of SB 863 on September 18, 2012. We will develop case law under SB
863 that hopefully will fall under these pages in future editions of this guidebook as these new provisions of the
Labor Code are implemented literally and by regulations. For now, we know that the new law still allows us to rebut
a strict permanent disability rating. We have included in this edition of the guidebook a comprehensive discussion of
SB 863 and how it affects the determination of permanent disability in Ch. 6.
We know that the rating string from a case that falls under the 2005 PDRS can be rebutted—specifically, the WPI
rating, the DFEC adjustment factor, and the injured worker’s occupational variant can be rebutted. We also know
that a permanent disability rating string that falls under the 2013 PDRS will allow us to rebut the WPI rating and the
occupational variant. For all injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2005 and including those dates of injuries that occur
on or after 1/1/2013, you can rebut the entire rating string based on Labor Code § 4662 and the LeBoeuf case,
discussed below.
As of the publication deadline of this guidebook in late 2018, we do not know how new Labor Code § 139.48, the
“Return to Work Fund” will be implemented. We know it will be applicable to injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013.
But it is unclear whether the legislature intended it to apply to dates of injury prior to 1/1/2013 where the permanent
disability rating is disproportional to the future loss of earnings suffered by an injured worker. The statute itself is
silent as to what dates of injuries it applies. We think, as we say in Ch. 5 of this guidebook, that section 139.48 is a
disguised codification of two out of three rebuttal methods described in the Court of Appeal decision in Ogilvie III,
also discussed below.
In this edition of this guidebook, we have kept our discussions about the evolution of the Almaraz-Guzman and
Ogilvie case law from beginning to end. This is for a number of reasons. First of all, the cases are still good law in
California workers’ compensation. None of these cases were repealed by SB 863. So rebuttal of a strict WPI rating
can still occur regardless of the date of injury where the 2005 or 2013 PDRS applies using the criteria allowed
under the Almaraz-Guzman case. In other words, if a case involves WPI ratings under the AMA Guides 5th Edition,
you can rebut the WPI rating consistent with Almaraz-Guzman III.
For injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, however, there is no longer a DFEC adjustment factor to rebut—unless
you creatively think of a way to rebut the 1.4 adjustment factor—other than by an applicant raising permanent and
total disability as an issue under section 4662. Secondly, hypothetically there could be further litigation in other
court of appeal districts that could challenge the decisions in Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie.
Page 2 of 2
§ 7.01 Overview
Third, the discussion of rebutting the permanent disability rating string for injuries that fall under the 2005 PDRS can
still be accomplished by one of the three methods described below in the Ogilvie III case. As stated above, we think
the Return to Work Fund (“RTWF”) established in Labor Code § 139.48 is an “Ogilvie” rebuttal in disguise. See Ch.
5 of this guidebook for a discussion of this issue. Our discussion of how to rebut the “average WPI to proportional
wage loss” in a Method 1 or Method 3 Ogilvie rebuttal is still viable information to understand how the Commission
on Health, Safety, and Workers’ Compensation will provide the proper information to the DWC to establish eligibility
for those RTWF benefits. Also, our discussion of a LeBoeuf rebuttal of a strict rating string as described by the
Court of Appeal in Ogilvie III is essential to keep intact in this guidebook.
This chapter starts with a discussion about developing the record with respect to an applicant’s history in the form of
deposition testimony. We then follow with a discussion of medical evidence including a discussion about medical
testimony and cross examination of physicians. Finally, we discuss current case law and how the record can be
developed to rebut a permanent disability rating under the 2005 PDRS either by way of rebutting a WPI rating, by
rebutting a DFEC adjustment or by doing both in a given case, which may require some expert reports and
testimony. Along the way, we will discuss rebutting permanent disability ratings for injuries that occur on or after
1/1/2013.
As you know, case law is in a state of evolution on the question of whether, how and when rebuttal of a rating under
the 2005 PDRS can be achieved. The discussion in this chapter is as current as the publication deadline of this
guidebook, and everything is in a state of change such that any version of the case law that is discussed here can
be modified, altered, reversed or overruled by subsequent case law. And now we have SB 863 to add to the
equation.
This is why this guidebook is updated every year. For the purposes of this year’s edition, the information in this
chapter is provided to you as a starting point so that you can understand the complexities and legal issues
presented in rebutting a rating under the 2005 PDRS or the new 2013 PDRS. The WCAB and the appellate courts
may change the way we analyze these cases, but in the meantime, the current case law applies to all WCAB
panels and judges and if there is any modifications of the current decisions, we believe they will follow prior
decisional law very closely with minor, if any, modifications.
This guidebook has heretofore referred to the diminished future earning capacity adjustments in the 2005 PDRS as
the “FEC adjustments.” For the purpose of this chapter and for consistency in the evolving case law, we will refer to
the “DFEC” or “DFEC rankings”, which mean essentially the same thing as the diminished “FEC” or “FEC rankings.”
We will painfully define these terms in more detail under our discussion below in the Ogilvie cases.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.02
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.02 Direct and Cross Examination of Applicants
[1] Introduction
The direct and cross-examination of an injured worker at depositions or trial for a workers’ compensation claim
that falls under the AMA Guides is different from adducing testimony during a deposition or trial that was based
upon the 1997 Rating Schedule. In order to understand the differences in an applicant’s testimony at trial in an
AMA Guides case, you must first analyze the issues during discovery, prior to trial. The analysis begins with the
applicant’s deposition testimony [see [2], below].
COMMENTARY:
Applicants’ attorneys would be doing a disservice to their clients if anyone other than a licensed
attorney familiar with the AMA Guides is present at the applicant’s deposition. The lawyering skills of
applicants’ attorneys are essential in the context of SB 899 cases now that applicants can be placed at
a disadvantage if they are not thoroughly prepared and informed about the legal and medical issues
they will encounter at the time of a deposition. The case law is being developed in what is, for all
practical purposes, a new system for which even 30 years of practicing workers’ compensation law
may not be enough for an attorney to adequately and successfully prosecute or defend these cases. ■
[2] Applicant’s Deposition
[a] General Categories of Questions
Many applicants’ attorneys are so used to the five general categories of questions that are asked in a
deposition that they routinely review issues under those categories in preparing each client for the
inevitable deposition. These categories of questions are:
1. The applicant’s employment history;
2. The applicant’s medical history;
3. The applicant’s injury history;
4. The applicant’s claims against the employer; and
5. The applicant’s present physical or emotional complaints he or she claims is caused by the industrial
injuries.
6. The applicant’s present physical or emotional complaints he or she claims would affect his or her
ADL functioning, work duties and performance of his or her essential job functions.
Depositions of applicants in an AMA Guides case are basically the same as testimony elicited in 1997
Rating Schedule cases under the five categories mentioned above. However, there are some differences
that are essential to the successful development of the record that if not adduced during a deposition could
prove detrimental to either side at trial. For example, a prior injury (industrial or non-industrial) may not have
caused any permanent impairment even though there may have been prophylactic restrictions. There may
Page 2 of 6
§ 7.02 Direct and Cross Examination of Applicants
or may not be apportionment under Labor Code § 4663 in such a case if there is no evidence of prior
impairments or if the prior injury did not affect the applicant’s ADLs or subsequent work activities.
Testimony adduced during a deposition must be more focused on the applicant’s history after the prior
injury in order to determine its severity on the applicant’s ADL functioning and work history. For further
discussion, see [b], below, and [3][a], below. For a list of ADLs from the AMA Guides, see Ch. 3, § 3.02 of
this guidebook. Defense counsel will want to determine whether any of the injured employee’s complaints
include sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction, or psychiatric disorders that are caused by a physical injury so
that no increase in a permanent disability rating can occur from them under Labor Code § 4660.1(c). Note,
however, that the same section requires that the employer provide treatment for these conditions on an
industrial basis if in fact any of them are compensable consequences of an industrially related physical
injury.
[b] Checklist of Questions in an AMA Guides Case
The following checklist may assist counsel in determining proper legal questioning in a case involving the
AMA Guides. This checklist is not fully comprehensive. It is intended only to make you think and develop
your own strategies in preparing for and participating in a deposition, whether you are preparing an
applicant for his or her testimony or you are defense counsel developing the record prior to trial. In fact, the
use of “scripts” is discouraged. Counsel should be carefully listening to the testimony and developing the
record rather than focusing on completing a list of questions during the deposition. By all means, counsel
should have a list of specific questions written down to ask the Applicant during a deposition or trial but
reliance on a script for a deposition detracts from the need to obtain specific testimony from the deponent
that assists counsel in the gathering and presentation of evidence.
Remember, the purpose of cross examination of a witness is twofold. First, cross examination is intended to
disprove a fact that the Applicant believes is true. Secondly, cross examination is intended to impeach or
discredit the credibility of the witness. In the context of a deposition of the Applicant, counsel should focus
upon the five categories of questions keeping in mind the goals of impeachment and disproving facts, and
in addition to simply confirm information the employer already has in its possession and to discover new
information the employer did not have.
A. EMPLOYMENT HISTORY
1. Who, what, where, when, how long?
2. Duties, level of arduousness required, level of skills required, any transferable skills learned?
3. Concurrent employment? Number of hours worked per day/week?
4. Did employee have supervisory duties? Hire/fire authority? Did employee train other employees?
5. Military service?
6. Educational background, degrees, certificates of completion, licenses?
7. Vocational profile (e.g., sedentary, unskilled; heavy, skilled; light, semi-skilled; sedentary, skilled,
etc.)?
8. Any post injury earnings? Did the injured worker look for work after the date of injury? Did the
injured worker look for work after he or she was declared MMI by a treating or evaluating
physician? If not, why not?
B. MEDICAL HISTORY
1. Health insurance coverage, primary care physicians, hospitalizations, emergency room visits,
urgent care facility visits, county facilities, veterans administration facilities?
2. Chiropractors, acupuncturists?
3. Prior diagnostic tests (X-rays, MRIs, CT scans, EMG/NCVs, cardiac studies, blood tests, lab
work)?
Page 3 of 6
§ 7.02 Direct and Cross Examination of Applicants
4. Prior or current history of systemic illnesses?
5. Family history, lifestyle history (smoking, alcohol, exercise, arthritis, cardiac history)?
6. Prior impairments?
NOTE:
Labor Code § 4663(d) requires that an applicant who seeks workers’ compensation benefits must
disclose the existence of any prior impairments to the claims administrator for the employer.
There are legal issues that need to be resolved concerning a person who may have a prior
impairment that is not in the same region of the body for which a claim is being made. Does
Labor Code § 4663(d) mandate the disclosure of the existence of an impairment if it is not related
to the same region of the body that is being claimed in an industrial injury? For example, if
someone is legally blind in one eye, that is a ratable impairment under Chapter 12 of the AMA
Guides, The Vision System, but does that person who is blind in one eye have to disclose that
fact to the employer or claims administrator if there is a low back injury claim? Federal or state
medical privacy laws may pre-empt Labor Code § 4663(d) from being enforced in such a case as
well as existing long standing case law that protects a person’s medical privacy when a claim is
filed for a particular body part or function [see, e.g., Allison v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (1999)
72 Cal. App. 4th 654, 84 Cal. Rptr. 2d 915, 64 Cal. Comp. Cases 624]. ■
NOTE:
Counsel representing Applicants should comply with Labor Code § 4663(d) by disclosing any
prior awards or impairments in the new OCR forms required under EAMS (Electronic Adjudication
Management System) implemented by the Division of Workers’ Compensation on August 25,
2008. Unfortunately, there are only prior case numbers that can be added under the new
Application for Adjudication of Claim form under EAMS, and there is no room to provide any
explanation about prior awards or impairments to comply with Labor Code § 4663(d). Counsel is
advised to provide any information about prior awards or impairments in the field provided in the
Application for Adjudication of Claim where the injury is described and parts of body injured
provided. There is plenty of room in this field box to provide information required under Labor
Code § 4663(d) without interfering with the information otherwise required within that section of
the Application for Adjudication of Claim. ■
7. Medications (current and recent)?
8. ADL functioning prior to date of injury? (See AMA Guides, Table 1-2, page 4, discussed in Ch. 3,
§ 3.02 of this guidebook).
C. INJURY HISTORY
1. Prior workers’ compensation injuries, claims, awards, settlements?
2. Prior personal injury claims, settlements, lawsuits?
3. Prior motor vehicle accidents, collisions?
4. Prior slip and fall injuries, sports related injuries, victim of violent crimes or domestic violence?
5. Prior psyche history? Prior symptom severity or personal, social or occupational functioning
difficulty (use GAF scale)?
6. Prior history of stressors (physical or emotional)?
Page 4 of 6
§ 7.02 Direct and Cross Examination of Applicants
D. CURRENT CLAIMS
1. What is applicant claiming? Specific injuries, continuous trauma, both?
2. Parts of body injured? (Think in terms of each body region, system, organ or body part
functioning)
3. Mechanism of injury if injury is specific; physical stressors and “injurious exposures” if claim is for
continuous trauma? If an injury was a specific injury, how violent was the impact?
4. Onset of symptoms, medical treatment since onset?
E. CURRENT COMPLAINTS
1. Any loss of motion (if case is orthopedic)?
2. Sensory deficits (pain, numbness, paresthesia, hypersensitivity)?
3. Motor function deficits (loss of power)?
4. Physical symptoms associated with claimed part of body or body function affected by industrial
injury?
5. Current ADL functioning (even if not at MMI)? (See Table 1-2 of AMA Guides, page 4, discussed
in Ch. 3, § 3.02 of this guidebook).
6. Non-exertional considerations (sleep patterns, fatigue, psychiatric symptoms based on DSM-IV
TR criteria for diagnosis)?
7. Exertional considerations (e.g., heart case—shortness of breath, palpitations, weakness,
malaise)?
8. Psychiatric symptom severity, if any, along with the effects applicant claims psychiatric
symptoms have on personal, social, and occupational functioning. Is the injured employee
claiming any sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction, or psychiatric disorders that are claimed to
be caused by a physical injury?
9. Effects of the Applicant’s objective impairments on his or her ability to perform job duties and the
essential functions of his or her usual and customary occupation, including a functional
capacity assessment if pain is not a factor.
10. Questions about the Applicant’s post injury earnings are essential under evolving case law. See
the discussion in the Almaraz-Guzman II, Guzman III, and “Ogilvie III” cases below. You want
to know how much wages the injured worker has earned since the date of injury in the event
there is a reason to challenge a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor that is part of a permanent
disability rating under the 2005 PDRS and utilizing the second method of rebutting the
scheduled DFEC adjustment that incorporates issues under the old LeBoeuf case. For 2013
and later dates of injury, you want to establish whether or not the Applicant is working at the
time of MMI findings by any physician and what his or her earnings were at that time,
compared to earnings made at the time of the injury. This testimony will impact whether or not
permanent disability advances are to be paid for an injured employee who is working at the
time of MMI findings by a treating or evaluating physician. See Labor Code § 4650(b)(2) for
further details.
WARNING:
Practitioners should take note of the Dahl case, in which the court of appeal held that both Ogilvie
and LeBouef required consideration of the effect of the injury on the employee’s injury to be
rehabilitated as the threshold issue, not simply whether there was a different calculation as to the
employee’s diminished earning capacity [see Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. (Dahl) (2015) 240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119]. For further discussion, see
Page 5 of 6
§ 7.02 Direct and Cross Examination of Applicants
§ 7.06[4][d], below. ■
NOTE:
A functional capacity assessment is probably not valid if the Applicant’s complaints of pain are not
substantiated by any objective factors or objective evidence. In a chronic pain syndrome case,
there has to be some pathophysiological explanation of the pain and the physician must comment
upon the validity of any functional capacity assessment in light of the pain complaints. As to
psychiatric cases, counsel should refer to the 2005 PDRS, pages 1-13 to 1-16, Global
Assessment of Functioning, and ask the applicant questions about these various levels of
impairment, similar to asking applicants about their impairments under the eight work function
impairment ratings pursuant to the 1997 Rating Schedule for psychiatric injuries. Remember,
some people have severe psychiatric symptoms but can function well personally, socially, and
occupationally, while other patients may have mild psychiatric symptoms, but have severe deficits
in personal, social, and occupational functioning. ■
Effective in 2013, the employer may provide the treating physician with a job description of an injured
employee’s usual and customary occupation. This is so that the physician can determine in a form provided
by the Administrative Director, what the injured employees work capacities and restrictions are, if any, and
whether or not the injured employee can return to his or her regular, modified or alternative work.
[3] Other Deposition and Trial Considerations
Counsel for the applicant and the defendant need to be prepared and have enough knowledge of both medicine
and the law to apply them in the process of gathering medical-legal evidence in an AMA Guides case.
In presenting trial testimony of an applicant in an AMA Guides case, the parties will have narrowed the medical-
legal issues at the time of the mandatory settlement conference, and the applicant’s testimony will focus upon
his or her factual information to meet the same burden of proof that he or she had in a 1997 Rating Schedule
case. The only additional testimony that needs to be adduced at trial in an AMA Guides case is the applicant’s
ADL functioning prior to the industrial exposure, his or her ADL functioning when he or she was declared MMI
by the treating or evaluating physicians, and his or her ADL functioning at the time of trial that the applicant
contends are directly or indirectly affected by the industrial injury or injuries. For a list of ADLs from the AMA
Guides, see Ch. 3, § 3.02 of this guidebook.
In addition, testimony about how the Applicant’s industrial injury affects his or her future earning capacity needs
to be adduced in the form of how the injured worker perceives what work activities, if any, would be impossible
or difficult to perform once the injury is declared MMI by the treating and evaluating physicians.
NOTE:
Testimony about the applicant’s ADL functioning may affect the ultimate WPI rating if a physician has
not added up to 3% for pain under AMA Guides, Chapter 18, and the WCJ feels that the applicant’s
subjective complaints justify up to a 3% additional WPI rating if the effect of the industrial injury on the
applicant’s ADLs are greater than expected from the WPI ratings opined by the treating and evaluating
physicians. See Ch. 2, § 2.06[4] of this guidebook, and the 2005 PDRS, page 1-12, located in
Appendix A and Appendix B, respectively, in this guidebook. ■
An applicant’s deposition should not need to last more than two hours for counsel to do a thorough job of
covering all five categories of questions in a workers’ compensation deposition [see [2][a], above]. Counsel for
both the applicant and the defendant should count on questions in a deposition occurring chronologically in time
Page 6 of 6
§ 7.02 Direct and Cross Examination of Applicants
from the applicant’s date of birth, through childhood illnesses or injuries, through the educational process, and
through his or her work history to the present time.
Counsel should review all medical records and reports including records obtained by subpoena in preparation
for both a deposition and trial. Prior medical records need to be reviewed for evidence of the existence of a
continuous trauma injury claim, prior impairments, apportionment of permanent disability, and any other issue
that can be influenced by past medical history (e.g., statute of limitations under Labor Code § 3600(a)(10), past
injurious exposures, or the non-existence of medical treatment for a claimed condition).
In light of evolving case law, counsel is reminded to always be aware of any objective medical findings that are
caused by an industrial injury and which are documented in operative reports, the physical examination
sections of medical reports, diagnostic and laboratory tests results and the discussion sections of treating and
evaluating physician reports.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.03
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.03 Direct and Cross Examination of Physicians
[1] Introduction
The traditional advice law professors told us in law school was that in taking testimony from a physician, do not
argue medicine and, instead, argue the facts or the law. Now that the AMA Guides apply in California workers’
compensation cases, that old maxim may no longer apply.
Despite the fact that eight years have passed since California has utilized the AMA Guides 5th Edition in its
workers’ compensation cases, too many physicians are not yet completely familiar with the descriptions and
measurements of impairments in the AMA Guides and cannot always correctly apply them in a given case.
Many physicians obtained a QME license prior to the enactment of SB 899 and did not enroll in continuing
education programs that teach the use and application of the AMA Guides and the 2005 PDRS. Still, licensed
QMEs and some AMEs will be selected in AMA Guides cases, even though many of them do not yet fully
understand the application of the new requirements and procedures for medical-legal reporting. Rule 11.5
requires that QME physicians obtain specific continuing medical education for a minimum of 12 hours every two
years, including a sample writing assignment during the training programs [see 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 11.5].
[2] Checklist of Questions in an AMA Guides Case
The following checklist provides a framework for counsel to develop specific questions to physicians in an AMA
Guides case. Like the checklist for applicant depositions set forth in § 5.01[2] of this guidebook, this checklist is
intended to make you think and develop your own strategies for questioning physicians. It is advisable to
develop questions that are relevant to the development of the record so that the physician’s testimony will
augment the record and make the judge’s decision making process easier.
A. PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS FOR PHYSICIANS
1. What edition, if any, of the AMA Guides did the physician have in his or her library prior to the
enactment of SB 899 (April 19, 2004)?
2. When was the last time, before April 19, 2004, that the physician referred to an edition of the AMA
Guides and for what purpose?
3. When did the physician receive the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides?
4. What knowledge, training, education, experience, skills, and abilities does the physician currently
have in using the AMA Guides in California workers’ compensation cases?
a. What kind of formal training has the physician received in using the AMA Guides?
b. Who conducted the classes or seminars?
c. Were any of the instructors who conducted the classes or seminars experienced in performing
medical-legal or treating physician examinations and reports in California workers’
compensation cases?
d. How much time (hours, days) did the physician receive formal training in the use of the AMA
Guides?
e. What chapters in the AMA Guides were covered during the physician’s training?
Page 2 of 5
§ 7.03 Direct and Cross Examination of Physicians
f. Is the physician familiar with the 2005 California permanent disability rating schedule, including
the instructions on its use?
g. How did the physician become familiar with the 2005 PDRS? Has the physician actually
reviewed the entire PDRS or has taken a rating class? If so, when and who conducted it?
h. Did the physician rely on any other resources in order to determine the impairment rating in this
case, such as a supplemental publication (e.g., this guidebook), a computer program or other
publication or discussion with any other physician?
B. SUBSTANTIVE QUESTIONS FOR PHYSICIANS
1. Are you familiar with the nuances in California workers’ compensation cases on the use of the AMA
Guides under the context of the 2005 permanent disability rating schedule? Did you ever read the
instructions for use of the 2005 PDRS?
2. Did you know that with respect to injuries to the upper extremities, each part of the upper extremities
are rated separately because different parts of the upper extremity are adjusted for loss of future
earning capacity, occupation, and age, and then combined?
3. Did you know that in carpal tunnel cases, you need to evaluate the range of motion of the affected
wrist, if any, combined with sensory deficits (tactile discrimination, two-point discrimination,
hypersensitivity and pain) combined with motor deficits (power strength loss) pursuant to Tables
16-10, page 482, 16-11, page 484, and 16-15, page 494 of the AMA Guides? Have you complied
with the instructions on page 495?
4. Did you know that Tables 16-10 and 16-15 allow the physician to rate carpal tunnel syndrome with
sensory deficit OR pain utilizing the criteria for Grades 0 through 5? Did you know that this analysis
is consistent with the instructions in the text on page 495?
5. Did you know that you can combine loss of motion with muscle weakness if the patient is using
maximum effort? See Section 16.8 of the AMA Guides.
6. Did you know that nowhere in Chapter 15 of the AMA Guides or, for that matter, anywhere else in
the AMA Guides, are the terms “injury” or “soft tissue lesion” defined? Did you know that the
authors of the AMA Guides never contemplated California law, which recognizes continuous
trauma work activities as a contributing factor for development of an impairment that results in an
“injury”?
7. Did you know that a patient with a history of myocardial infarction and hypertension are rated in both
Chapters 3 (The Heart, specifically Table 3-6) and Chapter 4 (The Cardiovascular System:
Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries, specifically Tables 4-1 and 4-2, page 66) of the AMA Guides?
8. Do you use computer software to calculate WPI ratings? Which one? Do you know what shortfalls, if
any, the software has? Does the software account for ankylosis on an uninjured side compared to
an injured side? Does the software account for pie chart measurements? How? How “true” are the
computer generated measurements compared to manual measurements?
9. Do you use computer based software to calculate permanent disability from WPI ratings? Which
program? What are the pitfalls of using that software? Does it account for California nuances and
the 2005 PDRS? How?
10. Who conducted the actual ROM measurements during the applicant’s physical examination? Who
or what instrument recorded the actual angles? Did the patient have a “warm-up period?”
11. What instruments did you use to conduct the ROM testing?
12. Did you test active range of motion, assisted range of motion, or passive range of motion? Did you
touch the patient while measuring ROM? How and why?
13. How did you arrive at the DRE Category? How did you arrive at the WPI rating within that DRE
Category? Why did you use the DRE method instead of the ROM method?
Page 3 of 5
§ 7.03 Direct and Cross Examination of Physicians
14. Did you know that the applicant has complained of radicular symptoms (pain, numbness, or
paresthesia) down his leg since his industrial injury occurred? Then, why did you opine his WPI to
be within a DRE Category II instead of DRE Category III? [Note: Read each category into the
record and attach Table 15-3, page 384, for lumbar spine, 15-4, page 389, for thoracic spine, and
15-5, page 392, for cervical spine from the AMA Guides to the deposition transcript. Then, read
quotes from medical reports and diagnostic testing that places the applicant clinically into the
correct category if the DRE method was proper.]
15. How did you arrive at the ROM WPI rating? What spinal disorder did you use from Table 15-7, page
404, of the AMA Guides? Why? How did you grade any neurological deficits (sensory and motor)?
Which charts, tables, or figures did you use to establish grades for sensory or motor deficits?
Which grades did you assign to each sensory and motor deficit, and how did you arrive at the
percentage of loss of sensory or motor function? Did you consider pain a part of the sensory loss?
Did you use the maximum impairment rating allowed for the involved nerve? Why did you use the
ROM method and not the DRE method?
16. In a musculoskeletal sprain case with documented loss of range of motion, how do you explain the
“DRE gap”? Would the ROM method be more clinically accurate than the DRE method in such a
case?
17. [In a neck injury case:] Did you know that the applicant has complained of radicular symptoms
down his left arm and into the dorsal area of his left hand with paresthesia in the left thumb, index,
middle, and half of his ring finger? Since there was a positive MRI of the neck showing some
pathology, isn’t it true that the applicant has a cervical radiculopathy? Did you know that the
radiculopathy needs to be rated based on sensory/pain and motor deficits in Tables 15-15, 15-16,
15-17 and 15-18, page 424, of the AMA Guides?
18. [In a lower extremity case:] Did you use Tables 17-1, page 525, and 17-2, page 526, of the AMA
Guides to determine the 13 ways which lower extremity impairments can be rated and which can
and cannot be combined with each other?
19. What other specialists should the applicant be referred to for evaluation of impairments that may be
caused by or related to the industrial injuries that are outside your medical specialty?
20. Did you know that different chapters of the AMA Guides may apply in an industrial injury claim
resulting in multiple ratings that are combined?
21. Did you add any additional impairment (up to 3%) for pain that has a greater than expected effect
on the applicant’s ADL functioning than what is expected by the WPI rating from the AMA Guides?
Why? Why not?
22. Did you review with the applicant the effects of his or her industrial injury on his or her ADL
functioning at the time you found him or her to reach MMI? Did you order a functional capacity
assessment? Why not? If you did, who conducted it, and have you reviewed the results in coming
to your conclusions about the applicant’s WPI? Do the results alter your opinion about the WPI
rating? If so, how?
23. In light of the WPI rating that you conclude exists in this case, do you believe that the applicant is
capable of working or is otherwise employable? If so, how, and in what kind of capacity? If not,
why not?
24. Do not forget the forever necessary hypothetical questions, e.g., “Should the court allow the use of
the ROM method in a specific injury case where there is only one level of impairment in the lumbar
spine, what would the applicant’s WPI rating be using the ROM method instead of the DRE
method?”
25. When you came to your conclusions in this lower extremity injury case, did you review Table 17-2,
page 546, of the AMA Guides for cross-usage of the 13 methods of evaluating lower extremity
impairments and which ones can be combined?
Page 4 of 5
§ 7.03 Direct and Cross Examination of Physicians
26. When you utilized Table 17-33, page 546, of the AMA Guides, the Diagnosis Based Estimates, did
you also consider any other method of evaluating this case from Tables 17-1, page 525, and 17-2,
page 526? If so, which ones, and why did or didn’t you utilize those other methods? Did you know
that a rating under Table 17-33 applies regardless of the result or outcome of any surgical
procedure? [See Ch. 3, § 3.17 of this guidebook to quote to the physician.]
27. Did you know that a corticospinal tract impairment can be combined with the DRE or ROM
impairment rating for a spinal injury? Did you know that the corticospinal tract impairment ratings
from Chapter 15 The Spine are the same as those for the same functional deficits listed under
Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System chapter in the AMA Guides?
28. Did you know that up to 3% WPI can be added to either a DRE or ROM impairment rating for spinal
injuries for pain related impairments that are greater than expected than the underlying rating
under the 2005 PDRS?
29. What evidence do you have that the Applicant’s impairment is permanent?
30. Does the strict impairment rating (based on ROM only, for example), accurately describe the effects
of the injury on the Applicant’s ability to perform work activities and his or her future earning
capacity? Is the strict WPI rating an accurate description of the impairment? What WPI rating
would be more accurate in terms of describing his or her impairment’s effect on his or her future
earning capacity? See the discussion below on rebutting the 2005 PDRS and the February 2009,
Almaraz-Guzman cases (74 Cal. Comp. Cases 201, WCAB en banc decision, hereinafter referred
to as “Almaraz-Guzman I” and September 3, 2009, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 WCAB en banc
decision, hereinafter referred to as “Almaraz-Guzman II”) and the District Court of Appeal case,
Milpitas Unified School District v. WCAB (Guzman), (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr.
3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837 (“Guzman III”).
31. Did you know that Figure 15-19 on page 427 has a footnote that allows you to convert regional
spinal impairment to WPI? Did you know that on page 9 of the AMA Guides, second column, the
authors refer to Figure 15-19 and state that you can rate a case under a WPI rating using a
regional impairment such as for fingers and the spine?
32. Do you know what the definition of a “cumulative trauma injury” is? This question was asked of a
PQME who wrote a deficient report in an orthopedic case. When the PQME refused to answer the
question, the deposition ended, his report was stricken from the record, the parties then went to an
AME, and the employer sought restitution from the PQME for the costs of his examination, review
of records and writing what they deemed a worthless report.
As you can see, the questions do become quite technical. An attorney’s working knowledge of medicine is
essential to successfully cross examine a physician in our use of the AMA Guides. When in doubt, walk the
physician though each applicable chapter of the AMA Guides that apply in your case. Walk the physician
through the instructions in the text, tables, charts, figures, checklists, and the 2005 PDRS nuances, if any.
Attach copies of text, tables, charts, and figures as exhibits to the deposition transcript so that the judge can
also see what points or contentions you are making.
Many excellent physicians make mistakes in coming up with an accurate WPI rating. Be sure to bring to the
physician’s deposition either a copy of the AMA Guides or at least pages from it that are pertinent to the cross-
examination.
At the conclusion of any deposition of a physician in these cases, be sure to reiterate ALL of the WPI ratings
the physician has concluded exist in the case for each part of body injured so that the judge has a clear
roadmap to developing formal rating instructions from one place rather than from within multiple reports and a
deposition transcript.
Questions for physicians at deposition are unlimited. We will dispense with a further discussion about questions
on apportionment of permanent disability since so many attorneys have had plenty of practice asking
physicians about pathology, retroactive prophylactic restrictions, and prior conditions since April 19, 2005, when
Page 5 of 5
§ 7.03 Direct and Cross Examination of Physicians
the Escobedo case was decided [see Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board
en banc opinion)].
The best physicians use their intuition to determine the proper diagnosis and to analyze the clinical findings on
examination and results of diagnostic tests. Judges have to use their intuition in evaluating cases under the
AMA Guides, especially if the applicant is in pro per, in order to determine what medical report is the most
persuasive and credible and to make a final decision in a case that is correct and accurate.
Do not hesitate to research and read about medical conditions in preparation for a deposition of a physician.
There are many public access resources you can turn to that are on the internet or published in book form that
you can use with very little time or expense necessary. Every attorney should use any of the following sources:
• Merck Manual
• Webmd.com
• National Public Library of Medicine (see www.nih.gov)
• Medscape (www.medscape.com)
• Attorney’s Textbook of Medicine (LexisNexis)
• See also Ch. 8 of this guidebook for a comprehensive list of medical resources.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.04
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.04 Medical Questions on Pathology
This section contains a list of important questions that counsel should have expert medical witnesses respond to on
the application of Labor Code § 4663. These questions should be addressed by the physician with reasonable
medical probability on the issue of whether pathology, asymptomatic conditions, or retroactive prophylactic
restrictions can be apportioned under Labor Code § 4663. Stated another way, the physician must state with
reasonable medical probability what approximate percentage of an impairment is directly caused by the industrial
injury and what percentage of an impairment is caused by other factors.
1. What evidence are you relying on to determine that other factors are a contributing factor of the permanent
impairment?
2. How did you arrive at the percentage of the impairment that is caused by the pathology or other factor?
3. What was the percentage of impairment caused by the pathology or other factors at the time of the injury?
4. What was the percentage of impairment caused by the pathology or other factor at the time the Applicant
became permanent and stationary?
5. What if the pathology developed concurrently with arduous job activities? For example, if the Applicant worked
for the same employer for 20 years, is now 45 years old, his or her job required arduous work activities, and he or
she developed degenerative disc disease that was not evident when he or she began his or her employment?
6. What if the pathology is post-traumatic from the industrial injury or resulting from surgery from an industrial
injury? Can you tell the difference between that and a pathology that is age related?
7. Of the multiple pathologies evident on the examination and diagnostic testing, how can you tell which pathology
is causing the impairment?
8. Can you say with reasonable medical probability how much permanent impairment there would be absent an
industrial injury that lights up an asymptomatic condition like degenerative disc disease?
9. How do you know that a patient’s prior treatment was because of a pathology as opposed to a transient event
like “sleeping funny” (usually myofacial pain) or a simple muscle strain that did not cause any impairments?
10. How can you tell what percentage of permanent impairment is directly caused by a pathology or other factor
absent the industrial injury?
11. How can you tell what percentage of permanent impairment makes the overall level of impairment worse due to
a pathology or other factor besides the industrial injury?
12. What is the source of a person’s impairment? For example, is a patient’s low back pain caused by stenosis, a
herniated disc, a torn annulus, or myofacial pain? Which factor is causing the impairment?
13. Doesn’t the term “idiopathic” mean a condition or pathology that does not come from a known cause?
Page 2 of 2
§ 7.04 Medical Questions on Pathology
14. Can the physician determine how long an injured worker has had degenerative disc disease? Can the physician
determine when and if that condition caused impairment?
15. Is the apportionment to other factors supported by any medical literature such as treatises, medical journal
articles, medical studies, or epidemiological data?
16. Is degenerative disc disease the human body’s method of adapting to the aging process without symptoms in
most cases being unpredictable as to when and if symptoms develop?
17. Does the industrial injury accelerate or light up the underlying degenerative condition as opposed to that
condition making the permanent impairment worse simply by its existence on the basis of the aging process?
18. Isn’t it true that there are patients who have a normal looking spine who have back problems?
19. Isn’t it also true that there are patients who have a horrible looking spine (by MRI, nerve conduction studies, and
CT scans) who have never had low back symptoms?
20. Could the degenerative changes we see in some patients who do not have symptoms be actually the changes
that are necessary to prevent disability as the spine ages and they are not in themselves disabling or causing any
impairment?
21. The main issues on apportionment are how and why does any pathology or other factor cause an impairment
that also results from an industrial injury?
22. Isn’t it true that risk factors such as age, gender, race, obesity, lifestyle choices are not pathologies since many
people with these risk factors do not develop medical conditions that result in an impairment? If you believe obesity,
lifestyle choices, smoking, age, race, or gender causes permanent impairment, how and why did these factors
apply in this case?
23. In cases where there is an early specific injury and later a claim for cumulative trauma, you should ask this
question: “If the Applicant received very little treatment after the specific injury and did not seek treatment again
until years later while performing the same job, isn’t that more likely evidence of a CT injury as opposed to someone
who continues treating for the specific injury all along?”
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.05
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.05 Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
[1] Whether Extrinsic Evidence Is Allowed
In this and the subsequent sections, we are reiterating our analysis of case law that evolved under the 2005
PDRS. Our discussions of these cases are still applicable to dates of injury that squarely fall under the 2005
PDRS. The discussion of rebutting a WPI rating also still applies to injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, as a
rebuttal WPI rating that complies with Guzman III applies to these dates of injury as well.
On February 3, 2009, the WCAB issued two landmark en banc decisions: Almaraz v. Environmental Recovery
Services; Guzman v. Milpitas Unified School District [74 Cal. Comp. Cases 201 (hereinafter called “Almaraz-
Guzman I”)], and Ogilvie v. City and County of San Francisco [74 Cal. Comp. Cases 248 (hereinafter called
“Ogilvie I”)]. In the spring of 2009, the WCAB granted reconsideration in all three cases and on September 3,
2009, the WCAB issued its decisions after reconsideration in all three cases [see Almaraz v. Environmental
Recovery Services (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (hereafter called “Almaraz-Guzman II”); Ogilvie v. City
and County of San Francisco (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1127]. On August 19, 2010, the Sixth District Court
of Appeal issued its published decision upholding the WCAB en banc decision in Almaraz-Guzman II [see
Milpitas Unified School District v. WCAB (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75
Cal. Comp. Cases 837, rev. den. 11-10-2010 (hereinafter called “Guzman III”)]. The First District Court of
Appeal reversed the WCAB en banc decision in Ogilvie II and adopted its own analysis and methods of how to
rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor [see Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2011) 197 Cal. App.
4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624, rev. den. 10-26-2011 (“Ogilvie III”)].
In order to explore the legal foundation for extrinsic evidence, we need to examine the wording of SB 899. We
know that Labor Code § 4660 mandates the development of a permanent disability rating schedule that is
uniform, consistent and objective. The rating schedule needs to be based upon the descriptions and
measurements of the AMA Guides 5th edition. The rating schedule needs to take into account a person’s
diminished future earning capacity for the same or similar injuries. The determination of loss of future earning
capacity must be based upon empirical data. Labor Code § 4600(c) also mandates that the rating from the
schedule is prima facie evidence of a person’s permanent disability as a result of an impairment that is directly
caused by each industrial injury.
In contrast, Labor Code § 4660.1, which is new under SB 863, does not define the term “permanent disability”
as a loss of future earning capacity—there is no definition of permanent disability at all. See our discussion of
these details in Ch. 5 of this guidebook.
What is an interesting and contradictory result of the law is that on one side of the equation, the law pursuant to
Labor Code § 4660 mandates that the permanent disability rating schedule be “uniform, consistent and
objective,” while at the same time, on the other side of the equation, the law pursuant to Labor Code §§ 4663
and 4664 mandates the apportionment of permanent disability be specifically individualized in each case. This
conflict results in some confusion about interpreting the law as a whole. Are we to expect the same or similar
ratings in every type of case, such as a back injury resulting in a DRE or ROM rating within a small range, but
at the same time require a specific analysis of each back injury in light of apportionment for each individual,
regardless of the requirement that things be uniform, consistent and objective? Then throw into the mix the
constitutional mandate to do substantial justice in every case.
Regardless of the outcome of this debate, the law does clearly state that a permanent disability rating pursuant
to Labor Code § 4660(c) is only prima facie evidence of a person’s permanent disability. The implication of this
Page 2 of 9
§ 7.05 Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
language in the statute is that if the legislature intended to bind the parties to an actual permanent disability
rating based solely on the impairment rating from the AMA Guides, the FEC, occupation and age adjustments,
then Labor Code § 4660(c) would have been worded differently, i.e., that a permanent disability rating is
“conclusive evidence” of permanent disability. In SB 863, the legislature carried on that tradition—that the
permanent disability rating schedule for dates of injury on or after 1/1/2013 is still “prima facie evidence” of a
person’s permanent disability, leaving open either applicant or defense counsel’s opportunities to rebut a strict
rating for these injuries.
The fact that the legislature did not make the rating conclusive, but only “prima facie” evidence of permanent
disability, implies that the legislature intended to allow extrinsic evidence to rebut a permanent disability rating
that was based upon any permanent disability rating schedule. Labor Code § 4660(b)(2) indicates that “an
employee’s diminished future earning capacity shall be a numeric formula based on empirical data and findings
that aggregate the average percentage of long-term loss of income resulting from each type of injury for
similarly situated employees.”
In fact, much of the debate about injured worker’s loss of future earning capacity currently being discussed prior
to SB 863 is the question about whether “loss of future earning capacity” includes consideration of a higher
temporary total disability rate combined with money derived from the 2005 PDRS or if diminished future earning
capacity should only be considered as part of the money derived from the 2005 PDRS and Labor Code § 4658
(the money chart). The various interest groups in discussing revising the DFEC adjustment within the 2005
PDRS focused upon this issue by citing a litany of empirical studies that support the various positions.
Needless to say, the issue of whether the DFEC adjustments are adequate or not is a political decision as it
was in the first place when the current one was adopted in 2005.
Under Labor Code § 4660.1, the debate is over for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 since there is only one
“DFEC” adjustment factor of 1.4. The legislature dropped the term “DFEC” from the lexicon of the 2013 PDRS.
This is probably because the 1.4 adjustment factor was a political compromise at the last minute when SB 863
was enacted after a flurry of legislative activity. Remember, SB 863 was a quiet storm in the making and its first
real version was quietly proposed on August 14, 2012. It changed dramatically into a second version on August
24, 2012, grew legs and morphed into its final version on August 30, 2012. However, the legislature decided to
keep intact from Labor Code §§ 4660 to 4660.1 the fact that a permanent disability rating for injuries on or after
1/1/13 are also prima facie evidence of permanent disability. This too allows counsel to rebut a permanent
disability rating even when the date of injury is on or after 1/1/13. In fact, some early WCAB panel case law is
emerging that indicates such a rebuttal is possible [see, e.g., Hanus v. URS/AECOM Corporation, 2018 Cal.
Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 355 (where a vocational expert along with credible orthopedic medical evidence
indicated the applicant was not amenable for vocational retraining and due to his work injuries was unable to
engage in any work activities rendering him permanently and totally disabled with no valid, legal
apportionment)].
In 2006, the WCAB en banc decision of Costa v. Hardy Diagnostic [(2006) 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1797]
answered some of the questions about the use of extrinsic evidence to rebut a permanent disability rating
based upon the 2005 PDRS. The WCAB acknowledged the argument that by using the language that a rating
was “prima facie” evidence of permanent disability in Labor Code § 4660(c), the legislature intended extrinsic
evidence to be allowed to rebut the rating. The WCAB indicated in its decision that how a rating on the 2005
PDRS can be rebutted is to be determined on a case-by-case basis. The WCAB did not indicate what kind of
evidence is sufficient to rebut a rating under the PDRS.
Since the case law now permits the use of vocational, actuarial, economic or any other expert besides a
physician or a rater, the first place to look for exactly what kind of evidence can rebut a rating under the 2005
PDRS is the language of the statute—Labor Code § 4660(b)(2) and (c), which will require development of the
record. The WCAB has implied in its decision in the Costa case that in order to rebut a rating under the 2005
PDRS, a party must indicate with reasonable probability that the DFEC adjustment in a particular case does not
adequately reflect the loss of future earnings in a given case for a given applicant. Expert testimony would have
to be developed that shows exactly why the DFEC adjustment that applies in a case is not correct and why. An
applicant could attack the specific DFEC adjustment for the part of body injured and provide evidence that the
adjustment was not properly developed by empirical evidence.
Page 3 of 9
§ 7.05 Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
In 2008, the Administrative Director issued a proposed 2009 PDRS effective for dates of injury on or after
1/1/09 and then revised to become effective for injuries on or after 7/1/09. This “2009 PDRS” was never
adopted by the Administrative Director. However, the diminished future earning capacity rankings were
increased to reflect new wage loss data and the parts of body injured were “re-stacked” to reflect more
accurately the relationship between an average impairment to a specific body part and the effects of that
impairment on injured workers’ loss of future earnings. Even though the “2009 PDRS” was never adopted, there
may be some room to argue in a case in which the date of injury is on or after 1/1/05 that a DFEC adjustment
from the “2009 PDRS” applies rather than the one from the 2005 PDRS. The DFEC adjustments for the 2005
PDRS were based upon three years of wage loss data that were based upon injuries and permanent disability
ratings under the 1988 PDRS and were not based upon ratings obtained from the AMA Guides. The DFEC
adjustments under the “2009 PDRS” are based upon three years of wage loss data and ratings under the AMA
Guides that may be more accurate and reliable data than the data relied upon that formed the basis of the
DFEC adjustments for the 2005 PDRS.
Expert testimony on this issue would be necessary in order to contend that a DFEC adjustment other than the
one assigned under the 2005 PDRS applies appropriately in a given case. Hypothetically, counsel could
present evidence that even under the non-adopted “2009 PDRS” for an injury occurring on or after 1/1/05, a
higher DFEC adjustment than the one specifically assigned under that schedule applies in a given case due to
the unusual circumstances of a particular case. It remains to be seen whether the WCAB or appellate courts
will go along with this method of rebutting a permanent disability rating under either the 2005 or so called “2009
PDRS.” It is clear that at least one District Court of Appeal did—see our discussion on the Ogilvie III case
below.
The WCAB, however, has implied under Costa and subsequent cases that it will allow rebuttal evidence that a
person is 100% permanently and totally disabled even if their impairment rating and subsequent calculated
permanent disability rating is under 100%. This is because of the draconian reduction of WPI ratings under the
Combined Values Chart, which differs considerably from the Multiple Disabilities Table under the 1997 PDRS.
An example of how the DFEC adjustments were established under the 2005 PDRS is for psychiatric injuries.
We know, for example, that people who have a psychiatric impairment will lose nearly 50% of their earnings
over three years from the date of an injury [see Working Paper, “Data for Adjusting Disability Ratings to Reflect
Diminished Future Earnings and Capacity in Compliance With SB 899,” RAND Institute for Civil Justice,
Seabury, Reville and Neuhauser, December 2004]. If this is true, and there is no reason to doubt it, then why is
the DFEC adjustment in the 2005 PDRS a category 8, which is an increase of 40% instead of 50%? The
increase under the non-adopted “2009 PDRS” was only 33% since the DFEC adjustment was a ranking of [4]
for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2009. The WCAB in Costa did indicate that the 2005 PDRS as developed
and adopted by the Administrative Director, including the DFEC adjustments, were based upon empirical data
as required by the statute.
Now, under SB 863, we have only one “DFEC” adjustment and it increases each WPI rating by a factor of
40%—everything in principle gets a Rank 8 DFEC adjustment of 40%, regardless of the part of body being
rated.
The WCAB and courts of appeal have allowed extrinsic evidence of permanent disability and total inability to
compete in the open labor market in cases that arise under the 1997 PDRS [see, e.g., LeBoeuf v. Workers'
Comp. Appeals Bd. (1983) 34 Cal.3d 234, 193 Cal. Rptr. 547, 48 Cal. Comp. Cases 587]. The WCAB in Costa
implied that in a case involving the AMA Guides and by operation ratable under the 2005 PDRS, extrinsic
evidence can be presented on permanent and total disability even if the rating is under 100%. Remember, the
AMA Guides rates impairment between 0% and 100%, the latter of which is dead or comatose. Where along
the continuum of 0% to 100% WPI permanent impairment ratings does a person reach a point of having
permanent and total loss of future earning capacity? The answer is that it would vary from one individual to
another based upon a totality of the case. So there is legal precedent for presenting evidence of permanent and
total disability.
But what about the loss of future earnings for a person who still can work after an industrial injury but whose
earnings are significantly reduced on account of that injury and the DFEC adjustment does not adequately
reflect that loss of future earnings?
Page 4 of 9
§ 7.05 Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
The prosecution and defense of workers’ compensation cases have always been on an economy of scale. Both
the applicant and the defense want to save costs and expenses, and the WCAB trial courts cannot afford the
time to be bogged down in protracted litigation over the medical and legal issues in these cases. At the same
time, the WCAB now allows parties to bring in expert vocational rehabilitation specialists and others who offer
evidence for or against the connection between a person’s measurable permanent impairment based upon the
AMA Guides and a specific loss of future earning capacity. A vocational expert may be able to quantify the
direct effect of a person’s impairment rating under the AMA Guides that is directly caused by an industrial injury
and the specific loss of future earnings that the industrial injury has caused or will cause.
The experts will have to show with reasonable probability how and why a particular industrial injury that caused
impairment will affect a person’s future earning capacity. This is easier said than done, since any conclusions
for or against the applicant is probably speculative because people are very adaptive to changes in their
functional capacities over time and any current expert opinions are subject to changes in the economy and
future technology advances in adaptive equipment and medical treatment. However, no method to determine
loss of earning capacity is foolproof, and the courts will have to determine the validity and reliability of evidence
presented on both sides.
With the reforms in SB 863 now in place, we know that the reports of vocational experts are admissible, thanks
to Labor Code § 5703(h), which is new and requires the vocational expert reports to be signed under penalty of
perjury with expert opinion based on the writer’s education, experience, knowledge, skill and abilities, and
reasonable scientific probability. In addition, testimony of a vocational expert starting on or after 1/1/2013, the
effective date of SB 863, can occur only on a showing of good cause. So vocational experts are now like
medical physicians—their reports are admissible if in a proper form required by statute, and expert testimony is
discouraged by requiring a good cause hearing to allow live testimony of a vocational expert.
[2] Proper Foundation Needed for Expert Testimony
As with any use of expert witnesses, counsel must establish the proper foundation for the use of expert
testimony. Counsel would have to establish the qualifications of the vocational expert and any other witnesses
as an expert in their respective fields. That would include consideration of the witness’s knowledge, skill,
education, experience, and background. Any parametric or non-parametric information would have to be
authenticated as reliable and valid and accepted in the scientific community as reasonably probative on an
expert’s conclusions that are being made based upon that information. Under California law, persons are
qualified to testify as experts if they have special knowledge, skill, experience, or education sufficient to qualify
them as experts on the subject to which their testimony relates [see Evidence Code § 720(a); see also Daubert
v. Merrill Dow Pharmaceuticals (1993) 509 U.S. 579, 113 S. Ct. 2786, 125 L. Ed. 2d 469 (in federal courts,
forms the basis for admission into evidence of scientific evidence; issues of whether scientific evidence is valid
and reliable are legal questions for trier of fact)].
We suggest in light of SB 863 and new Labor Code § 5703(h) that counsel includes a copy of the vocational
expert’s curriculum vitae as part of his or her submitted expert witness report so that the proper legal foundation
of the expert is established as part of the record.
[3] Vocational Expert Testimony
This section is written with the understanding that as of 1/1/2013, live testimony of a vocational expert is
allowed only upon a showing of good cause. We can think of one or two scenarios where this would be
allowed—if a WCJ wanted the record developed after reading vocational expert’s reports, or if the parties
agreed to an “agreed vocational expert.” We actually have agreed to AVEs in our cases and perhaps this is the
beginning of a trend—it saves money, time, and creates a clear record from which a WCJ and the WCAB can
rely.
The vocational expert reporting for the applicant would use a sequential step analysis of the injured worker’s
medical conditions, AMA Guides WPI rating(s), past relevant work and earnings, and residual functional
capacity to determine whether the person has suffered a total loss of earning capacity due to the impairments
that are work related. The vocational expert would have to know precisely what WPI rating a WCJ would find in
the case. Otherwise, reliance on one side’s medical conclusions as opposed to the other side’s would make
Page 5 of 9
§ 7.05 Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
that testimony speculative and worthless until everyone knew what the ultimate WPI rating would be in the
case.
For the hypothetical case where the applicant is claiming permanent total disability, but where the 2005 PDRS
rating is less than 100%, a vocational expert would have to establish the following facts:
• The applicant’s educational background.
• The applicant’s past relevant work history, including the specific vocational profiles, earnings, skill levels,
and arduousness. Past relevant work under federal Social Security guidelines is the 15-year period
prior to the onset of a disability.
• Whether the applicant has developed any transferable skills and, if so, what.
• If the applicant has transferable skills, can he or she perform them and, if not, why not?
• Is the applicant able to perform sedentary, unskilled work, where sedentary means the applicant is unable
to lift/carry up to 10 lbs. frequently and up to 20 lbs. occasionally with a sit/stand option?
• Is the applicant feasible for job retraining?
If the vocational expert’s conclusions are that the applicant cannot perform his or her past relevant work, cannot
perform any transferable skills, cannot perform unskilled sedentary work, and is not feasible for retraining, then
the conclusion is that the applicant is permanently totally disabled and has a total loss of future earning
capacity. (By the way, this conclusion by a vocational expert in a Social Security disability case results in
entitlement to Title II or Title XVI Social Security disability or SSI disability benefits, respectively.) If the work-
related impairment is the direct cause of the person’s inability to perform sedentary, unskilled work and inability
to be retrained, then there is an argument that the person is 100% permanently and totally disabled on an
industrial basis.
Of course, the defense witness in a workers’ compensation case would want a shot at this applicant to testify
that there are sufficient jobs in the national, regional, or local economy that the injured applicant could perform,
despite his or her work related impairments. As is often the case in Social Security disability cases, many
administrative law judges ask a claimant why he or she could not work as a “greeter” at a retail store with a “sit
or stand option”, which requires virtually no physical effort but only requires that the employee show up on time
in a presentable manner.
In an AMA Guides case, counsel would be wise to have the treating or evaluating physician(s) review the
expert’s reports including any conclusion regarding the applicant’s lack of feasibility for retraining. In addition,
expert opinion from physicians would be essential in proving that despite having a WPI rating of something less
than 100% the applicant has a totally diminished future earning capacity and is permanently and totally disabled
from any employment or earning capacity. In order to constitute substantial medical evidence, the physician
would have to indicate how and why the applicant cannot earn a living now or in the future and how this
condition is directly caused by the industrial exposures.
In light of the “Guzman III” and “Ogilvie III” cases, discussed below, counsel is advised that all reports from a
vocational expert in all disputed WPI rating cases should be reviewed by a physician who may issue an
alternative WPI rating based on the vocational expert’s opinion of how an industrial injury causes permanent
work function impairments.
In a contested permanent and total disability case involving the AMA Guides, remember the language in Labor
Code § 4662, which states:
Any of the following permanent disabilities shall be conclusively presumed to be total in character: (a) Loss
of both eyes or the sight thereof. (b) Loss of both hands or the use thereof. (c) An injury resulting in a
practically total paralysis. (d) An injury to the brain resulting in incurable mental incapacity or insanity. In all
other cases, permanent total disability shall be determined in accordance with the fact.
The last sentence in that section may apply especially in cases involving the AMA Guides for example where
the Applicant has a 60% WPI impairment rating each for orthopedic, psyche and internal medical conditions
based on AME opinions and the permanent disability rating equals 98% after adjustment for everything, This
result is because of the Combined Values Chart which drastically reduces the overall ratings despite serious
Page 6 of 9
§ 7.05 Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
totally incapacitating injuries and impairments of this Applicant. Expert testimony from a vocational expert along
with citing the last sentence of Labor Code § 4662 may result in a 100% permanent and total disability award,
especially in cases where the Applicant is clearly totally incapacitated from working despite what the ultimate
rating is under the 2005 PDRS. There is no known published court of appeal decision that has interpreted the
meaning of the last sentence in Labor Code § 4662. See our discussion of Labor Code § 4662 presumption
cases in Chapter 4 of this guidebook.
If counsel intends to depose an expert witness, a vocational expert or QME/AMR medical-legal expert and
plans on asking hypothetical questions to the expert witness, it is extremely important for counsel to be able to
prove at trial the elements of the hypothetical questions. Otherwise, testimony of the expert would be
speculative if counsel is unable to prove the underlying facts that formed the basis of a hypothetical.
SB 863 preserves the use of Labor Code § 4662 in appropriate cases. Labor Code § 4660.1 indicates that the
2013 PDRS does not abrogate the existence of cases that fall under that section. Remember, Labor Code
§ 4662 creates a presumption of permanent total disability based on specific types of conditions, or “based on
the fact.” These cases fall outside the AMA Guides, and WPI ratings in these cases are actually irrelevant.
[4] Evidence of Loss of Future Earning Capacity
What if a case involves an applicant who is claiming that his or her permanent disability rating from the 2005 or
2013 PDRS does not adequately reflect his or her loss of future earning capacity? What would an expert
present as evidence that there is a greater loss of earning capacity than is considered in the PDRS rating and
the DFEC for the part of body injured? Suppose, in such a case, the applicant can still work, but cannot earn as
much money because of impairments that are directly caused by an industrial injury?
For example, suppose an applicant is a school maintenance worker who suffers a serious industrial asthma
condition resulting in a 45% WPI rating under Chapter 5 of the AMA Guides along with a 10% WPI psychiatric
impairment and a 2% WPI speech/voice impairment, with no apportionment to non-industrial factors, and based
upon the conclusions of AMEs in the respective specialties. The combined values chart leaves a grand total
WPI to be 52%. The overall permanent disability rating for the maintenance worker who is 39 years old on the
date of injury would be 58% permanent disability. The applicant’s pre-injury earnings as a maintenance worker
was $68,000 per year. His residual functional capacity includes the provision that he cannot lift/carry over 50
lbs., he cannot work outdoors, and he cannot be exposed to fumes, dust, or particulates.
The rating of 58% permanent disability is equal to $73,755 if the date of injury occurred in 2005. You can see
how low this amount is in comparison to the loss of future income from a quasi-civil service job that pays well
over the course of a 39-year-old man’s life expectancy. The factual question is, how much loss of future income
is this applicant going to experience one year, five years, ten years, twenty or more years, post injury? Can any
amount of loss of future earnings be predicted based upon reasonable scientific probability? What evidence is
needed to prove or disprove these contentions? What if the employer offered modified or alternative work
based upon the applicant’s transferable skills?
Any expert witness for the applicant and defendant would have to review all relevant medical evidence in the
case, along with the legal documents and deposition testimony of witnesses, in order to formulate opinions
about the effects of impairments on the applicant’s future earning capacity.
The vocational expert, actuary, or economist should conduct the following testing:
• Work evaluation/vocational profile utilizing the U.S. Dept. of Labor’s Dictionary of Occupational Titles
(D.O.T.)
• Residual functional capacity assessment
• Transferable skills analysis
• Work capacity assessment
The work evaluation and vocational profile are standard assessments that are made by vocational specialists
throughout the nation. This involves identifying the specific work duties, skills, education, knowledge,
experience, abilities, compensation, and the levels of arduousness actually performed in the applicant’s past
Page 7 of 9
§ 7.05 Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
relevant work history. The work evaluation testing determines the applicant’s current physical and mental
tolerances after reaching maximum medical improvement following his or her industrial injuries.
Vocational testimony must utilize scientifically valid and reliable evidence to support a contention that there is a
loss of future earnings that is not correctly or adequately reflected in the 2005 or 2013 PDRS rating. Vocational
specialists must insist upon a functional capacity evaluation to be made on an injured worker as part of the
evaluation process. That functional capacity evaluation is to be performed by either a physician or physical
therapist and should produce data from testing an applicant over a period of three to five days. There are
nationally accepted protocols for functional capacity assessments including those listed in Form PR-4 pursuant
to ADR 9785 [8 Cal. Code Reg. § 9785]. There are specific residual functional capacity assessment instruments
that are in the public domain that are published by the Social Security Administration. There are also nationally
accepted standards for residual functional capacity assessments called the Blankenship system that every
physical therapist and vocational expert knows about. In addition, the vocational expert should perform a
transferable skills analysis utilizing the same standards that are used nationally.
One method of conducting a transferable skills analysis in connection with determining an estimate of
diminished loss of future earning capacity is the use of the McCrosky Transferable Skills Program software.
This is a proprietary computer program that takes into account the applicant’s past relevant work, skills,
education, and work experience, and it determines with statistical significance any transferable skills and
predicted future earnings based upon jobs that an injured worker could perform. The program utilizes the U.S.
Dept. of Labor’s Dictionary of Occupational Titles (D.O.T.) that indicates the level of skills, description of duties,
and arduousness of each type of job classification in the national, regional, and local economies. This program,
and perhaps others that are utilized by vocational counselors, have demonstrated validity and reliability in the
courts outside the WCAB, and time will tell whether these experts and their instruments will be admitted into
evidence in workers’ compensation cases.
That being said, the vocational or other expert would also have to establish how and why the applicable DFEC
adjustment under the 2005 PDRS does not accurately reflect the specific applicant’s permanent loss of future
earning capacity as a result of the industrial injury. Does this mean that the expert must establish that a higher
DFEC adjustment within the 2005 PDRS does apply or that none of them apply?
The point is that in 1997 Schedule cases, we never needed that high of a level of scientific evidence to support
the contention that a less than 100% rated applicant is permanently and totally disabled from the open labor
market based solely upon a vocational expert’s testimony and a work evaluation report. To apply these
concepts to a 2005 or 2013 PDRS case requires much stronger and persuasive scientific evidence to rebut the
presumption that a rating under the 2005 or 2013 PDRS is prima facie evidence of an applicant’s permanent
disability. This will be required regardless of whether the applicant is claiming permanent total disability or
contending that the 2005 or 2013 PDRS inadequately reflects the applicant’s diminished future earning capacity
as a direct result of his or her industrial injuries, even though the applicant is still able to work.
This is why new Labor Code § 139.48 is so interesting. The Return to Work Fund will be administered by the
DWC Administrative Director to establish rules regarding eligibility for injured workers whose permanent
disability is disproportional to his or her loss of future earnings. Any decision by the AD on eligibility for these
benefits can be appealed to a trial judge at the WCAB on the same grounds as a Petition for Reconsideration
pursuant to Labor Code § 5903. This implies to us that the injured worker would be entitled to a trial de novo on
the issue of eligibility. We don’t know at this time whether this presentation of evidence would include a
vocational expert’s report to be submitted to the AD, the WCJ, or both.
A completely different angle for an applicant’s attorney to rebut a permanent disability rating under the 2005
PDRS is not to only attack the accuracy of the DFEC adjustment but to also attack other aspects of the 2005
PDRS and its framework. For example, one of the most troublesome aspects of both the AMA Guides and the
2005 PDRS is the adoption of the Combined Values Chart (page 604 of the AMA Guides, which is inaccurate,
and pages 8-1 through 8-4 of the 2005 PDRS, which is accurate).
The Combined Values Chart is a mathematical formula that differs quite a bit from the Multiple Disabilities Table
from the 1997 PDRS. The Combined Values Chart greatly reduces the combination of two or more impairments
that occur within the same region or between separate regions of the body. Remember, the MDT applies to
Page 8 of 9
§ 7.05 Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
multiple parts of body injured and refers to reduced ability to compete in the open labor market under the 1997
PDRS.
The AMA Guides in Chapter 1 caution us not to use the AMA Guides alone in our workers’ compensation
systems. The Combined Values Chart may not be consistent with the concept that the California workers’
compensation system now compensates for permanent impairments that cause diminished future earning
capacity. So what happens to an injured worker who has only worked in a standing position his or her entire
adult life (such as a construction laborer, carpenter, farm laborer) and who injures the lumbar spine and a knee,
suffering impairments to both? Isn’t there an argument that can be put forth that the combined effects of the two
impairments on the applicant’s future earning capacity is much greater than the sum of the two impairments
than they would be individually and the Combined Values Chart reduces the overall negative effects of both
impairments on the applicant’s future earning capacity? Would the 2005 or 2013 PDRS be more accurate in
calculating one’s diminished future earning capacity for people with multiple impairments without the use of the
Combined Values Chart? Perhaps expert testimony from the Disability Evaluation Unit or outside expert opinion
would shed some light on this approach.
Defendants would argue that the Combined Values Chart prevents inflation of the effects multiple impairments
have on a person’s future earning capacity. Furthermore, defendants would argue that the Combined Values
Chart is a part of the “descriptions and measurements” of the AMA Guides and must be used in conjunction
with calculating an overall impairment rating. Creative minds exist in our system and we will continue to see a
lot of that at work while the trial judges, WCAB panels and appellate courts make some new law on how to
rebut a rating under the 2005 or 2013 PDRS.
The WCAB said in its en banc opinion in the Costa case at 71 Cal. Comp. Cases pp. 1818–1819:
It appears that in choosing to retain the language that the PDRS “shall be prima facie evidence of the
percentage of permanent disability to be attributed to each injury covered by the schedule” in section 4660
(while changing almost everything else in that section), the legislature intended to continue to allow the
parties the opportunity to present rebuttal evidence to ratings under the new PDRS. The effect, if any, of
the changes to section 4660 as to what evidence may actually rebut a rating under the PDRS will be
decided, at least initially, on a case by case basis.
At this point in time, WCAB itself is not telling us what type of evidence would constitute substantial evidence to
rebut a rating under the 2005 PDRS. However, in 2009, the WCAB has given us some hints.
[5] Costs of Expert Testimony and Vocational Testing
The next issue is since the WCAB now allows expert witnesses to testify about an applicant’s diminished future
earning capacity as a direct result of work related impairments, the next question is, who pays for the expert
witnesses’ testimony and vocational testing that is required to form the basis of the expert’s conclusions? Labor
Code § 5811 allows for a party to recover costs in the prosecution of workers’ compensation cases, as a matter
of discretion by the judge and WCAB.
Applicants have utilized this section liberally over the years to recover costs when their counsel takes a
physician’s (AME’s, QME’s or treating physician’s) deposition and then seeks reimbursement from the claims
administrator for the costs of the court reporter, transcripts, and the expert witness fees paid in advance to the
physician. The WCAB in the Costa case [72 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 1819] has indicated that reasonable
expenses of expert witnesses and any vocational testing are recoverable costs for the applicant under Labor
Code § 5811 [see also Barr v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2008) 164 Cal. App. 4th 173, 73 Cal. Comp.
Cases 763].
SB 863 mandates that the Administrative Director establish a vocational expert witness fee schedule by
January 1, 2013 [see Lab. Code § 5307.7].
[6] Procedural Considerations
If counsel intends to present expert witness testimony and introduce documentary evidence from experts in
order to rebut a permanent disability rating based upon the 2005 or 2013 PDRS, you must disclose the
existence of the witness and documentary evidence at the time of the Mandatory Settlement Conference.
Page 9 of 9
§ 7.05 Rebutting the 2005 PDRS—Before Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie Cases
Counsel on both sides must be sure to list the names of the expert witnesses and any documentary evidence to
be relied on at the time of trial [see Grupe Co. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Ridgeway) (2005) 132 Cal. App.
4th 977, 34 Cal. Rptr. 3d 98, 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 1232].
If you do not list the names of witnesses or documentary evidence on the MSC Statement then you are running
the risk of being afoul of Labor Code § 5502(e)(3) and may not be allowed to call the experts or rely on their
reports.
Also, be sure that your expert is prepared to respond to the permanent disability rating that a judge concludes
the applicant has in a case. If there is no AME, then the experts for both sides must be prepared to rebut any
rating that may be issued by the judge based upon the conclusions of the treating and evaluating physicians in
a case since counsel will not know which physician a judge will rely on in his or her opinion.
Obviously, expert reports or testimony to rebut a permanent disability rating under the 2005 or 2013 PDRS is
made easier if the parties use an AME in the case since the permanent disability rating will be known by the
parties at the time of trial in most cases. You may have to wait until after formal rating instructions have been
issued by the judge and then request further proceedings in order to present rebuttal evidence from your
experts. However, you must still list your potential experts and documentary evidence early on at the MSC
before you even know what the 2005 or 2013 PDRS rating will be.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.06
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
[1] Introduction
[a] Current Law
The Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie cases [see [b], below] have become famous in the last few years, and
they continue to make a significant impact on our law practices and for that matter on physicians’ medical
practices. As of October 2011, the Almaraz case had been severed from the Guzman case. The Guzman
case went on to become a final decision in a published opinion by the Court of Appeal and is binding on all
WCAB trial judges and the WCAB itself.
The Court of Appeal in Almaraz denied a writ and in 2011, the Supreme Court denied a hearing in that
case, leaving only the DCA decision in Guzman (called “Guzman III”) applicable. Ogilvie III now exists as a
published Court of Appeal Decision in which the Court reversed the WCAB en banc decision and knocked
out the “Ogilvie Formula” and replaced it with three possible methods of rebutting a scheduled DFEC
adjustment factor. The California Supreme Court denied review of Ogilvie III on October 26, 2011, and the
District Court of Appeal decision is binding on all WCAB panels and trial judges until and unless a separate
case reaches the appellate court with a different result or the legislature changes Labor Code § 4660. So
you can see that the law is in an ever evolving state on the 2005 PDRS, even seven years after its
inauguration.
In fact, the legislature did change Labor Code § 4660 and added Labor Code § 4660.1 that eliminates the
DFEC adjustment factors completely from a permanent disability rating string for injuries that occur on or
after 1/1/2013. This, in effect, only makes Ogilvie III relevant for cases that fall under the 2005 PDRS. But,
perhaps not. As stated in Ch. 5 of this guidebook, we think Labor Code § 139.48 Return to Work Fund
benefits are either a codification of Ogilvie III or is substantially based on that decision.
We decided to include the step-by-step evolution of the Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie cases from start to
finish. We have eliminated the algebra from the Ogilvie decision since its application has been reversed by
the Court of Appeal, and it is doubtful the “Ogilvie Formula” will return in some other form.
The most important point to remember at this point in time is that the law currently allows a party to rebut a
strict rating with respect to the WPI rating (Guzman III), the DFEC adjustment (Ogilvie III), or occupational
variant. These rebuttals can occur in the same case at the same time or on an individual basis.
For injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, a party can rebut the WPI rating (Guzman III), the occupational
variant, and the 1.4 adjustment factor. The legislature left intact the Ogilvie III decision since they did not
specifically overrule it in SB 863.
WARNING:
Practitioners should take note of the Dahl case, in which the court of appeal held that both Ogilvie
and LeBouef required consideration of the effect of the injury on the employee’s injury to be
rehabilitated as the threshold issue, not simply whether there was a different calculation as to the
employee’s diminished earning capacity [see Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. (Dahl) (2015) 240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119]. For further discussion, see
[4][d], below. ■
Page 2 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
[b] Historical Perspective
On February 3, 2009, the WCAB issued two landmark en banc decisions: Mario Almaraz v. Environmental
Recovery Services/Joyce Guzman v. Milpitas Unified School District [74 Cal. Comp. Cases 201 (hereinafter
called “Almaraz-Guzman I”)], and Wanda Ogilvie v. City and County of San Francisco, [74 Cal. Comp.
Cases 248 (hereinafter called “Ogilvie I”)]. In the spring of 2009, the WCAB granted reconsideration in all
three cases and on September 3, 2009, the WCAB issued its decisions after reconsideration in all three
cases [see Almaraz v. Environmental Recovery Services (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084 (hereafter
called “Almaraz-Guzman II”); Ogilvie v. City and County of San Francisco, (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases
1127]. On August 19, 2010, the Sixth District Court of Appeal issued its published decision upholding the
WCAB en banc decision in Almaraz-Guzman II. See Milpitas Unified School District v. WCAB (Guzman)
[(2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837, rev. den. 11-10-2010
(hereinafter called “Guzman III”)]. The First District Court of Appeal reversed the WCAB en banc decision in
Ogilvie II and adopted its own analysis and methods of how to rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor
[see Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal.
Comp. Cases 624, rev. den. 10-26-2011 (“Ogilvie III”)].
These cases address when and how a permanent disability rating that is based on the descriptions and
measurements of the AMA Guides 5th Edition and the DFEC adjustments in the 2005 PDRS can be
rebutted. In previous editions of this guidebook, and earlier in this chapter, we have discussed the
difficulties physicians were having in determining an impairment rating when an underlying industrially-
related medical condition was not listed or rated in the AMA Guides 5th Edition. We also observed that in
many cases, a WPI rating for a listed medical condition and the permanent disability rating based thereon
was extremely low compared to the effect of the rated impairment on the injured worker’s ability to engage
in work activities, thereby permanently affecting his or her future earning capacity. We also discussed how
vocational experts may be used in workers’ compensation cases to develop the record in determining an
accurate rating based on how an industrial injury affects an injured worker’s future earning capacity.
The three cases that the WCAB selected to research and deliberate all have a commonality in that each
injured worker has not been able to return to work in his or her usual and customary occupation—truck
driving for Mr. Almaraz, school secretary for Ms. Guzman and a transit authority bus operator for Ms.
Ogilvie. This is no coincidence. The WCAB has been aware of an underlying theme in the post-SB 899
era—that in too many cases, there has been a huge difference between an injured worker’s WPI
impairment rating and resulting permanent disability rating and the apparently permanent impact of the
industrial injury on the injured worker’s future earning capacity. This is not a political statement but rather a
cold truth that is supported by current, reliable empirical research—the DWC’s own proposed “2009 PDRS”
that re-stacked the DFEC rankings and increased impairments to earnings loss ratios (a revision of Tables
A and B of the 2005 PDRS).
Some of us have speculated about why the WCAB issued these opinions in the first place. One thing is
clear, however. In Almaraz-Guzman I, the WCAB compared appellate decisions in six other states (Arizona,
Florida, New Hampshire, Hawaii, New Mexico and South Dakota) and how those jurisdictions, some with
similar enabling statutes as California's Labor Code § 4660, use the AMA Guides to establish permanent
disability benefits. The WCAB commissioners and research staff discovered that none of these states utilize
a “strict” (some say “pure”) interpretation of the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides to
establish impairment ratings.
These jurisdictions use the Guides as guidelines only and impairment ratings are geared towards the
individuals with objective medical findings and permanent factors of disability caused by impairments. In
these states, there has to be a connection between objective medical factors and the ultimate permanent
impairment or permanent disability rating. In these jurisdictions that use one form of the Guides or another,
they do not treat a rating from the Guides as gospel. Each of the aforementioned states requires a tribunal
or industrial accident commission to take into account how an injury that results in an impairment affects a
person’s ability to engage in work activities. The WCAB in California has borrowed this concept from other
Page 3 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
states that have used various editions of the AMA Guides in their workers’ compensation systems for
decades.
There are many reasons why the WCAB issued these en banc decisions. First, judges and WCAB panels
have seen too many cases that involve a 0% WPI rating in which a physician imposes permanent work
restrictions caused by an industrial injury and the injured worker loses his or her job because of the
restrictions. Similarly, the WCAB has seen cases that result in a very low permanent disability rating under
the AMA Guides but the injury has an apparently significant effect on the injured worker’s future earning
capacity.
Secondly, there has been a great deal of controversy involving the role of the DEU raters in these cases.
The raters were trained to adopt strict interpretations of the descriptions and measurements of the AMA
Guides and at the same time resisted creativity and activism by physicians, parties and judges in adopting
liberal interpretations and use of the Guides [see Ch. 2 of this guidebook (8 Cal. Code Reg. § 10602 and
role of raters versus role of judges)].
Thirdly, the WCAB is probably trying to tell the legislature and the Administrative Director to increase
permanent disability ratings because the 2005 PDRS is inadequate. Also, the WCAB wants to put a stop to
individuals and groups who are profiteering by reviewing California workers’ compensation medical-legal
reports and reducing ratings that are “not accurate” under very strict and radically conservative
interpretations of the Guides.
Finally, the WCAB wanted to establish some ground rules for rebutting DFEC adjustments without
unnecessary litigation with routine use of vocational experts who use a variety of strategies and methods to
rebut the DFEC component of a rating under the 2005 PDRS.
[2] Factual Background
[a] Almaraz
In the Almaraz case [see 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084], Mr. Almaraz was a truck driver who sustained a
specific injury to his lumbar spine with a right lower extremity radiculopathy. He had an L4-L5 laminectomy
and upon his recovery from the surgery he returned to work for a different employer as a truck driving
school instructor. He could no longer drive a truck due to the residuals from his back injury and surgery.
Mr. Almaraz was examined by an AME in orthopedic surgery who opined that he reached maximum
medical improvement and has a DRE Category III 12% WPI and he was permanently “restricted to light
work and no prolonged sitting.” Based on a review of a formal job description, the AME concluded that the
Applicant could not return to work as a truck driver. Under the 2005 PDRS, the Applicant had a permanent
disability rating of 17% before apportionment. Under the 1997 PDRS and based upon the permanent work
restrictions, the Applicant had a permanent disability rating of 58% before apportionment.
The matter proceeded to trial and the WCJ awarded the Applicant 14% permanent disability after
apportionment since 20% of the 17% permanent disability under the 2005 PDRS was due to non-industrial
degenerative disc disease award was based on the 2005 PDRS, which did not take into account any of the
work restrictions the AME imposed in the case. Because of the disparity between the 17% permanent
disability rating from the 2005 PDRS and the 58% permanent disability that would have been awarded
based on permanent work restrictions under the 1997 PDRS, the Applicant filed a Petition for
Reconsideration, claiming that the rating under the 2005 PDRS was disproportional and inequitable
compared to the effect the industrial injury had on the Applicant’s ability to perform work activities and his
permanent loss of future earning capacity.
[b] Guzman
In the Guzman case [see 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084], Ms. Guzman was a school district secretary who
suffered from bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and was post surgery to both wrists. The AME, Dr. Feinberg
[Disclosure: Dr. Feinberg peer reviewed the first edition of this guidebook], opined that the Applicant
sustained a “loss of 25% pre-injury capacity for pushing, pulling, grasping, gripping, keyboarding and fine
Page 4 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
manipulation.” As far as the application of the 2005 PDRS, the AME concluded that the Applicant has a 3%
WPI rating for each wrist because she had surgery and the AMA Guides directs a 5% upper extremity
impairment rating per wrist (a 3% WPI) for a post surgical carpal tunnel release. The AME also concluded
that the Applicant could not return to her job as a school district secretary because the duties were beyond
her work capacity.
In his AME report, Dr. Feinberg felt that Ms. Guzman lost 25% of her function of each arm and since each
arm is worth a 60% WPI, 25% of that would be a 15% WPI rating. He opined that a 15% WPI rating for
each wrist would be more appropriate for this claim if he was allowed to deviate from a strict application of
the AMA Guides 5th Edition. He noted that the effect of the wrist impairment on her ADL functioning would
justify the higher rating per wrist.
The case went to trial at which a DEU rater testified. The rater indicated the proper rating under the AMA
Guides 5th Edition would assign a 3% WPI as indicated, which results in a 12% permanent disability rating
for both wrists. The rater testified that if the alternative 15% WPI per arm method suggested by the AME
applied, the Applicant’s permanent disability rating would be 39% PD. The trial judge awarded the Applicant
the 12% permanent disability based on a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides 5th Edition and rejected
any alternative method. Applicant filed a Petition for Reconsideration, essentially contending that the
alternative rating was more commensurate with the Applicant’s loss of function to both wrists and arms from
her industrial injury and a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides resulted in a disproportionate and
inequitable award of permanent disability.
[c] Ogilvie
Ms. Ogilvie sustained an admitted industrial injury to her knee, back and neck on April 1, 2004 while
working as a San Francisco transit bus operator. She was 59 years old on the date of injury and had a total
knee replacement surgery on May 8, 2006 with a further recommendation that she have a lumbar
laminectomy with a two-level anterior interbody fusion. She did not have the back surgery and she has not
worked since April 1, 2004. She accepted a service retirement in 2007 and is receiving Social Security
disability benefits.
There were dueling QME reports in the case since the date of injury was prior to 1/1/05 but the parties
stipulated at trial to split the difference between the ratings from the applicant QME report and the defense
QME report and that if the Applicant’s disability was rated in accordance with the 2005 PDRS, it would rate
28% after adjustment for age and occupation and after a further stipulation of 25% apportionment equaling
permanent disability in the amount of $26,700.
Each party called their own qualified vocational and DFEC expert witnesses who agreed that the
Applicant’s diminished future earning capacity was about 51–55%, agreeing that she would have earned
about $335,686 over her expected work life if she had not been injured and had to retire but she would
have earned between $158,025.92 and $178,562.88 during her expected work life.
The WCJ issued a Findings and Award awarding Applicant 40% permanent disability after adjusting for
age, occupation and after apportionment. The WCJ concluded that the Applicant rebutted the 2005 PDRS
because the “scheduled” rating of 28% would not “fairly, adequately and proportionately” compensate the
Applicant for her diminished future earning capacity of between 51% and 53% as determined by the
vocational experts.
The WCJ evaluated the rebuttal of the 2005 PDRS using three methods that were based on the evidence
presented at trial. The first is using the diminished future earning capacity percentage as the permanent
disability rating (51–53% DFEC, which was earnings the Applicant would have earned absent her injuries
minus what she would have earned with the injury and then subtracting the 28% scheduled rating equals
between 38% and 40% “permanent disability”).
The second method indicated that the Applicant's loss of future earnings is about $172,000, which is a split
between the two expert's estimates. Labor Code § 4658 says that injured workers should not be
compensated for more than two-thirds of their loss of future earnings. Therefore, two thirds of $172,000 is
$114,667 which is about a 71.5% permanent disability rating. This 71.5% permanent disability rating must
be reduced by the agreed 25% apportionment, so the injured worker has a 54% permanent disability.
Page 5 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
In the third method, the WCJ modified the DFEC adjustments in Table B of the 2005 PDRS. The judge then
compared the dollar amount of a 28% permanent disability ($26,700) with the loss of earnings estimate of
$114,667 based on the expert testimony and concluded that the DFEC had to be adjusted in order to make
the actual rating less disproportional to the Applicant’s actual loss of earnings. The WCJ came up with a
final rating under the third method of 42% without further adjustment for the Applicant’s age, occupation
and apportionment since this was based on the originally stipulated “scheduled” permanent disability rating
of 28% that already took these factors into account. We assure you that reading the actual method #3 in the
Ogilvie decision will make your head spin.
The WCJ awarded a 40% permanent disability award based on the range of the evidence using the three
methods, and the Defendant filed a Petition for Reconsideration [see Ogilvie v. City and County of San
Francisco (2009) 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1127].
[d] Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) or “Guzman III”
PRACTICE POINT:
The holding of the District Court of Appeal in Guzman III applies to all dates of injury on or after
1/1/2005, those that occurred prior to 1/1/2005 where the AMA Guides apply [see Lab. Code
§ 4660(d)], and to injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013. Pursuant to SB 863, specifically Labor
Code § 4660.1, the legislature has indicated that the revisions of the Labor Code on permanent
disability do not affect the case law on rebuttal of a WPI rating by a physician in accordance with
Guzman III. ■
On February 3, 2009, the WCAB issued its first en banc decision in Almaraz-Guzman I [74 Cal. Comp.
Cases 201]. Upon reconsideration, on September 3, 2009, the WCAB issued its second opinion in Almaraz-
Guzman II [74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084]. On August 19, 2010, the Sixth District Court of Appeal issued its
published decision in Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman), [(2010) 187
Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837, rev. den. 11-10-2010], herein referred
to as “Guzman III”, which affirmed the WCAB en banc decision in Almaraz-Guzman II. The defendants in
Guzman III subsequently filed a Petition for Review with the California Supreme Court on September 28,
2010, and the Petition was denied in 2011.
So what did the district court of appeal say in their published decision affirming the WCAB en banc
decision? The justices essentially merged conclusions of the WCAB from Almaraz-Guzman II into a single
final decision: The language of Labor Code § 4660 permits reliance on the entire AMA Guides to the
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, including the instructions on the use of clinical judgment, in deriving
an impairment rating in a particular case.
The DCA decision should be noted for what the justices said rather than what arguments they rejected from
the employer community, insurance industry, Director of the DIR and chambers of commerce. The DCA
panel discussed the history of Labor Code § 4660, including the provision in section (b)(1) that “ ‘the nature
of the physical injury or disfigurement’ shall incorporate the corresponding percentages of impairments
published in the American Medical Association (AMA) Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
(5th Edition).”
The DCA panel emphasized the legislature’s reference to the word “incorporate” and distinguished between
a party’s ability to rebut a rating from the 2005 PDRS from a party being allowed to rebut a WPI rating that
is part of a rating from the 2005 PDRS. Here’s what the DCA said about use of the AMA Guides in
determining the nature of physical injury or disfigurement [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 848]:
Applying the settled rules of statutory construction, we agree with the District that the Guides must be
applied “as intended” and “as written,” but we take a broader view of both its text and the statutory
mandate. Section 4660, subdivision (b)(1), recognizes the variety and unpredictability of medical
situations by requiring incorporation of the descriptions, measurements, and corresponding
percentages in the Guides for each impairment, not their mechanical application without regard to how
Page 6 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
accurately and completely they reflect the actual impairment sustained by the patient. To “incorporate”
is to “unite with or introduce into something already existent,” to “take in or include as a part or parts,”
or to “unite or combine so as to form one body.” (Webster’s Third New International Dict. p. 1145
(1993); Random House Dict. of the Eng. Lang. 2d ed. (1987) p. 968; American Heritage Dict. 3d ed., p.
588.) Section 4660, subdivision (b)(1), thus requires the physician to include the descriptions,
measurements, and percentages in the applicable chapter of the Guides as part of the basis for
determining impairment.
We cannot expand the statutory mandate by changing the word “incorporate” to “apply exclusively.”
Nor can we read into the statute a conclusive presumption that the descriptions, measurements, and
percentages set forth in each chapter are invariably accurate when applied to a particular case. By
using the word “incorporation,” the Legislature recognized that not every injury can be accurately
described by the classifications designated for the particular body part involved. Had the Legislature
wished to require every complex situation to be forced into preset measurement criteria, it would have
used different terminology to compel strict adherence to those criteria for every condition. A narrower
interpretation would be inconsistent with the clear provision that the Schedule—which itself
incorporates the Guides (PDRS p. 1-2)—is rebuttable (§ 4660, subd. (c)), and it would not comport with
the legislative directive to construe the workers’ compensation statutes liberally “with the purpose of
extending their benefits for the protection of persons injured in the course of their employment.
(§ 3202.)
So here, the DCA is essentially telling us that a given WPI rating must be “accurate” in terms of how a
rating reflects the effect an impairment has on a person’s ADL functioning. In the next section of its opinion,
the DCA tells us that uniformity, consistency and objectivity mandated by Labor Code § 4660(d) refers to
the 2005 PDRS and not to a WPI rating derived from the AMA Guides, which is established in Labor Code
§ 4660(b)(1), a completely separate sub-section of the Labor Code [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 849]:
… Subdivision (d) of the statute is specifically addressed to the development, adoption, and
amendment of the Schedule itself, not the physician’s evaluation of impairment. Nevertheless, we have
no reason to question the implicit assumption that while directing those features to the Schedule itself,
the Legislature sought consistency, uniformity, and objectivity in the overall process of determining
disability across individuals.
Then the DCA emphasizes the instructions in the AMA Guides on page 11 that mandates that an
evaluating physician uses his or her clinical judgment based on his or her experience, training, skill,
thoroughness in clinical evaluation and ability to apply the AMA Guides. The DCA also cites page 1-4 of the
2005 PDRS that mandates a physician to use his or her clinical judgment in evaluating unlisted medical
conditions that cause objective findings with measurable impairment by comparing with similar conditions
that also cause measurable impairment of function in performing ADLs. The DCA mandates that the entire
AMA Guides 5th edition, including Chapters 1 and 2 apply in our cases [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 850]:
Accordingly, while we agree with the District that the Guides should be applied “as intended” by its
authors, such application must take into account the instructions on its use, which clearly prescribe the
exercise of clinical judgment in the impairment evaluation, even beyond the descriptions, tables, and
percentages provided for each of the listed conditions. The Board aptly observed that the descriptions,
measurements, and percentages cannot be dissociated from the balance of the Guides, particularly
Chapters 1 and 2, which contain the instructions on the appropriate use of the ensuing chapters to
perform an accurate and reliable impairment evaluation. “Thus, the AMA Guides is an integrated
document and its statements in Chapters 1 and 2 regarding physicians using their clinical judgment,
training, experience and skill cannot be divorced from the balance of the Guides.
The DCA emphasized what the WCAB en banc decision included—that a physician cannot provide a higher
WPI rating just in order to achieve a desired result and that all WPI ratings must be based upon substantial
evidence. Here is exactly what the DCA panel says about a physician using alternative rating methods [75
Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 851]:
Accordingly, a physician’s medical opinion that departs unreasonably from a strict application of the
Guides can be challenged, and it would not be acceptable as substantial evidence or fulfill the overall
Page 7 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
goal of compensating an injured employee commensurate with the disability he or she incurred through
the injury. If Guzman’s carpal tunnel syndrome, for example, is adequately addressed by the pertinent
sections of Chapter 16, an impairment rating that deviates from those provisions will properly be
rejected by the WCJ. As the Board’s decision does not disregard, retreat from, or compromise the
requirement of substantial evidence, we cannot conclude that it erred to the extent that it allows
physicians to use their clinical judgment in applying the Guides. The District’s assertion that the
WCAB’s decision encourages a physician to misapply the Guides freely by using “ ‘any chapter, table
or method’ he/she deems more appropriate” is not well taken.
What is interesting about this paragraph is that the DCA suggests that Dr. Feinberg, the AME in Guzman,
should start with Chapter 16 of the Guides (The Upper Extremities) and must state how and why any other
chapter, table or method is more accurate in rating Ms. Guzman’s carpal tunnel syndrome. For that matter,
Dr. Feinberg indicated in his reporting that the applicant lost 25% of her upper extremity function for each
arm, which is a 15% WPI since an entire arm is worth a 60% WPI for total loss of use of an arm.
This derives from Table 16-3 on page 439, which is within Chapter 16. So all Dr. Feinberg has to do at this
point is explain how and why he believes application of Table 16-3 is the most accurate method of
determining the applicant’s WPI rating as opposed to utilizing the strict method of rating carpal tunnel
syndrome based on page 495, which yields a 3% WPI for each wrist. In his original reporting, Table 16-3
was apparently not mentioned as the basis of his rating. What any physician should do in the appropriate
case is instead of using Table 16.3, which is just a simple conversion chart from upper extremity to whole
person impairment, a better analysis would be to refer to the maximum value of full loss of function of an
extremity, such as a hand, elbow, shoulder, or leg. This can be accomplished by looking at the proper
charts that show the value of an amputation at certain levels since there is 100% loss of function if a part is
missing. See, for example, Figure 16-2 for the hand, elbow, shoulder, and arm.
What is interesting about the DCA decision is that the justices expect Chapters 1 and 2 of the AMA Guides
to apply in all cases, and mechanical application of the descriptions and measurements in Chapters 3
through 17 do not apply in a vacuum. The DCA states [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at pp. 851–852]:
Those first two chapters make it clear that an impairment rating based solely on the descriptions,
measurements, and percentages in the succeeding chapters without the use of physicians’ clinical
judgment, training, experience, and skill would contravene the assumptions and intent of the authors.
The failure to follow all of the instructions in the first two chapters could result in useless evidence,
inadequate diagnostic reasoning, and inaccurate and inconsistent ratings.
But what about use of a strict rating? The DCA seems to require one first and then alternative WPI ratings
may be allowed later [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 852]:
Given the comprehensiveness and precision attendant in the chapters pertaining to each system, in
most cases a WCJ will credit ratings based strictly on the chapter devoted to the body part, region, or
system affected.
Labor Code § 4660(c) mandates that the 2005 PDRS constitutes “prima facie evidence of the percentage of
permanent disability to be attributed to each injury covered by the schedule.” The DCA quoted the WCAB
en banc decision that included long established case law that allows a party to rebut a permanent disability
rating. The DCA upheld the WCAB in its conclusion that any component of a rating under the 2005 PDRS
can be rebutted. But in rebutting a strict WPI rating, the DCA said [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at pp. 853–854]:
… Simply presenting a view contrary to an established rating in the Guides, however, would not be
sufficient to rebut the PDRS rating. As discussed earlier, an impairment rating that is inadequately
supported by evidence and reasoning-and unquestionably, a rebuttal position arrived at by hunting
through the Guides for a more favorable rating—will result in an opinion the WCJ will necessarily reject
as insufficient evidence. The Board itself emphasized that substantial evidence is necessary to
establish a permanent disability, and any opinion proffered without “facts and reasoning [that] justify it”
will not be sufficient. Any WCJ would err by allowing the scheduled rating to be rebutted based on an
obviously inapplicable section of the Guides. (Footnote omitted)
…
Page 8 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
… If the physician expresses the opinion that the chapter applicable to a particular kind of injury does
not describe the employee’s injury, but all other chapters address completely different biological
systems or body parts, it would likely be difficult to demonstrate that that alternative chapter supplies
substantial, relevant evidence of an alternative WPI rating. In order to support the case for rebuttal, the
physician must be permitted to explain why departure from the impairment percentages is necessary
and how he or she arrived at a different rating. That explanation necessarily takes into account the
physician’s skill, knowledge, and experience, as well as other considerations unique to the injury at
issue. In our view, a physician’s explanation of the basis for deviating from the percentages provided in
the applicable Guides chapter should not a priori be deemed insufficient merely because his or her
opinion is derived from, or at least supported by, extrinsic resources. The physician should be free to
acknowledge his or her reliance on standard texts or recent research data as a basis for his or her
medical conclusions, and the WCJ should be permitted to hear that evidence. If the explanation fails to
convince the WCJ or WCAB that departure from strict application of the applicable tables and
measurements in the Guides is warranted in the current situation, the physician’s opinion will properly
be rejected. Without a complete presentation of the supporting evidence on which the physician has
based his or her clinical judgment, the trier of fact may not be able to determine whether a party has
successfully rebutted the scheduled rating or, instead, has manipulated the Guides to achieve a more
favorable impairment assessment.
What exactly does the DCA mean by this section? Can a physician still use a different chapter, table or
method that is outside the applicable chapter of the AMA Guides based on the underlying part of body in
question, such as carpal tunnel syndrome in Chapter 16? How about Chapter 13, Table 13-22 on page 343
for rating chronic pain in one upper extremity, or Table 13-15 on page 336, the station and gait impairment
rating, instead of using Chapter 17 for a knee injury? Can a physician use Table 6-9, the hernia table, for an
injured worker with a bad back but no hernia? It appears that the DCA is still allowing use of any chapter,
table or method allowed under the AMA Guides as long as the physician describes how and why an
alternative rating is more accurate.
Notice that the DCA opinion does not settle the issue of what a “more accurate” rating means? The DCA
reiterates that a physician’s conclusion must constitute substantial evidence and “fulfills the overall goal of
compensating an injured employee commensurate with the disability he or she incurred through the injury”
[75 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 851]. The DCA further reiterated the WCAB en banc decision indicating that a
physician needs to utilize Chapters 1 and 2 of the AMA Guides “to perform an accurate and reliable
impairment evaluation” [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 850]. The penultimate goal is for physician’s reports to
constitute substantial evidence and for any WPI ratings to be accurate and reliable with the goal of
compensating an injured employee commensurate with the disability he or she incurred through the
industrial injury.
Does accuracy of a rating only take into account the effects of industrially caused impairment on ADL
functioning or can a physician take into account the effects of an impairment on work functioning as well?
This is really an academic argument since many ADL functions also include work functions such as sitting,
standing, walking, stair climbing, writing, typing, driving, lifting and so forth. Some physicians refer to them
as “work ADLs” since they appear as “ADLs” in Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA Guides. So it appears that
the DCA, like the WCAB, want WPI ratings to reflect how a work injury-caused impairment affects a
person’s ability to perform work activities that overlap with ADL functioning in order to be the most accurate
rating.
What does the DCA panel mean by its assertion [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 854]: “In our view, a
physician’s explanation of the basis for deviating from the percentages provided in the applicable Guides
chapter should not a priori be deemed insufficient merely because his or her opinion is derived from, or at
least supported by, extrinsic resources.”
The term “a priori” means “without prior analysis.” This assertion seems to mean that a physician may
utilize new medical science that updates the applicability of rating impairment in the 5th edition of the AMA
Guides. For example, the criteria for diagnosing complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) in an upper
extremity in Table 16-16 are obsolete. New diagnostic criteria for that condition exist in the medical
Page 9 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
community, and the DCA seems to say that new diagnostic criteria can be used to justify impairment
ratings.
The DCA states that a physician may rely on “standard texts or recent research data as a basis for his or
her medical conclusions, and the WCJ should be permitted to hear that evidence” [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at
p. 854]. So a physician cannot obtain a WPI rating outside the AMA Guides but he or she can refer to
outside resources to obtain a diagnosis that results in a WPI rating that has to be derived from the 5th
Edition of the Guides.
Finally, in its conclusion, the DCA panel emphasizes the mandate that a physician arrive at the most
accurate ratings and explain his or her reasoning along with the evidence he or she is relying on in arriving
at his or her conclusions [75 Cal. Comp. Cases at p. 855]:
By using the word “incorporate” and retaining a prima facie standard for the introduction of the PDRS
ratings, the Legislature obtained a more consistent set of criteria for medical evaluations while allowing
for cases that do not fit neatly into the diagnostic criteria and descriptions laid out in the Guides. The
Guides itself recognizes that it cannot anticipate and describe every impairment that may be
experienced by injured employees. To accommodate those complex or extraordinary cases, it calls for
the physician’s exercise of clinical judgment to evaluate the impairment most accurately, even if that is
possible only by resorting to comparable conditions described in the Guides. The PDRS has expressly
incorporated the entire Guides, thereby allowing impairment in an individual case to be assessed more
thoroughly and reliably.
Does this mean that alternative ratings can only apply in “complex or extraordinary cases” and strict ratings
apply in all other ones? No, the decision seems to say that there always has to be an accurate rating in all
cases, complex or not, and impairment in an individual case must be assessed thoroughly and reliably. Ms.
Guzman’s wrist condition is neither complex nor extraordinary, yet the effects of her wrist impairment on her
ability to work are significant. Recent attempts to call for limitations of alternative ratings to only “complex or
extraordinary” cases have fallen short of convincing judges and WCAB panels that the DCA decision in
Guzman III limits alternative ratings to such cases.
By affirming the WCAB en banc decision in Almaraz-Guzman II, the court of appeals appears to adopt the
accepted practice for a physician to identify permanent objective medical findings that are caused by an
industrial injury and to find a WPI rating that most accurately reflects the effect of those permanent
objective medical findings on the injured worker’s ADL functioning, including work functioning. The bottom
line is for every physician to indicate how and why an ultimate WPI rating is the most accurate, whether
based on a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides or based on an alternative rating method.
Physicians should be advised by all counsel to provide a strict WPI rating from the AMA Guides, state
whether it is accurate or not and then offer a “Guzman III” alternative rating that is more accurate and, if so,
explain how and why it should be adopted as opposed to a strict one. Physicians may offer a strict WPI
rating and not mention accuracy at all and place the burden on a party to develop the record to obtain an
alternative rating that may be contended to be more accurate than a strict one. The DCA opinion seems to
allow physicians to take either tact.
Experience so far indicates that it is preferred that a physician in his or her original MMI report, provide a
full explanation of his or her WPI ratings, whether based on a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides or
based on an alternative rating method, or both, with a full explanation of what permanent objective medical
findings exist and how the industrially caused impairment affects the injured worker’s functioning. If the
physician adopts the alternative rating method as the most accurate, he or she must state with reasonable
medical probability how and why it is more accurate than a strict rating.
[3] Ogilvie III
[a] Effect of SB 863
SB 863 did not specifically overrule the ultimate Ogilvie decision [see Ogilvie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. (2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624 (“Ogilvie III”)]. Labor
Page 10 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
Code § 4660.1 merely eliminated the existence of the DFEC adjustment factors from the permanent
disability rating string. More technically, the legislation eliminated “diminished future earning capacity” as
part of the definition of permanent disability for injuries that occur on or after 1/1/2013. We include the full
discussion of the Ogilvie case here because it is still relevant to injuries that are rated using the 2005
PDRS. It may also be relevant in determining eligibility for the $120,000,000.00 annual Return to Work
Fund that is also mandated by SB 863 under new Labor Code § 139.48. We may be applying principles
enunciated by the DCA in Ogilvie to determine eligibility for those benefits when an injured worker’s
permanent disability rating is disproportionate to his or her future earning capacity.
[b] 2005 PDRS
On July 29, 2011, the First District Court of Appeal issued its long awaited decision on Ogilvie v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2011) 197 Cal. App. 4th 1262, 129 Cal. Rptr. 3d 704, 76 Cal. Comp. Cases 624
(“Ogilvie III”)]. The decision reverses the WCAB en banc decision [see 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1127] and
remands the matter back to the WCAB to determine whether Ogilvie effectively rebutted the application of
the 2005 PDRS. In its decision, the Court of Appeal reversed use of an individualized diminished future
earning capacity adjustment factor as a means to rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment that came directly
from the 2005 PDRS.
In this section, we will discuss the specific findings of the Court of Appeal and will explain its ramifications
for practitioners along with commentary. So what does the Court of Appeal say and how do we apply its
findings and conclusions in our cases? Is algebra out and you no longer need to calculate WPI to wage loss
ratios using EDD data and a control group? The answer to both is “yes.” Is LeBoeuf back into play? “Yes,”
LeBoeuf has been resurrected by the Court of Appeal. Does “diminished future earning capacity” mean the
same thing as “loss of ability to compete in the open labor market?” Apparently, according to the Court of
Appeal, the answer is “yes.”
WARNING:
In the only subsequent appellate decision discussing rebuttal under the Ogilvie rationale, the
court in Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl) [(2015) 240 Cal. App. 4th
746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119], provided substantial clarification on the necessary
requirements to rebut the PDRS. In Dahl, the applicant had been awarded 59% in the initial trial
in the matter. Both parties presented rebuttal evidence to the PDRS; however, the WCJ rejected
the arguments for rebuttal, concluding rebuttal under Ogilvie was available only where it
supported a permanent total disability. On appeal the WCAB reversed the WCJ and remanded,
instructing the WCJ to consider rebuttal where the rating was less than 100%.
The trial judge, relying on the opinion of applicant’s expert, awarded a 79% permanent disability,
substituting the expert’s DFEC percentage for the rating from the PDRS. Defendant appealed and
the WCAB upheld the award. However, the Court of Appeals reversed, finding the evidence relied
upon by the WCJ and the WCAB did not meet the minimum requirements under both Ogilvie and
its predecessor decision in LeBoeuf v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. The court of appeal held that
both of those cases required consideration of the effect of the injury on the employee’s ability to
be rehabilitated as the threshold issue, not simply whether there was a different calculation as to
the employee’s diminished earning capacity. Practitioners should take note of the Dahl case, in
which the court of appeal held that both Ogilvie and LeBouef required consideration of the effect
of the injury on the employee’s injury to be rehabilitated as the threshold issue, not simply
whether there was a different calculation as to the employee’s diminished earning capacity [see
Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl) (2015) 240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80
Cal. Comp. Cases 1119].
The Dahl court noted:
… Dahl sought to invoke the second method approved in Ogilvie (the “LeBoeuf method”)
under which the employee shows she “will have a greater loss of future earnings than
Page 11 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
reflected in a rating because, due to the industrial injury, the employee is not amenable to
rehabilitation.” (Ogilvie, 197 Cal.App.4th at p. 1275.) Dahl’s “rebuttal,” however, included no
evidence that the industrial injuries she sustained to her neck and shoulder rendered her
incapable of rehabilitation. Rather, her “rebuttal” consisted solely of a vocational expert’s
opinion that his method for determining Dahl’s diminished future earnings capacity produced
a higher rating than that of the rating produced by the Schedule and that his method more
accurately measured Dahl’s diminished future earnings.
Dahl’s attempted rebuttal did not comport with any of the methods approved in Ogilvie for
rebutting the rating provided using the rating schedule and is therefore foreclosed by Ogilvie.
The Dahl court also emphasized the presumption in favor of the rating under the PDRS and the
limited ability to rebut that rating:
… Under the 2004 amendments, a claimant’s scheduled rating is presumptively correct.
Ogilvie confirmed the Legislature meant what it said, and that claimants may not rebut their
disability rating merely by offering an alternative calculation of their diminished future earning
capacity. While Ogilvie found the 2004 amendments did not overthrow certain long-held
approaches to calculating earning capacity, it clearly did not intend those approaches to be
construed so broadly as to return us to the ad-hoc decision making that prevailed prior to
2004. Following the WCAB’s approach in this case would do just that. Claimants could rebut
their presumptively correct disability rating merely by presenting an analysis that shows a
greater diminished future earning capacity than that determined by applying the Schedule
… .
The court of appeal also expressed its skepticism an employee could adequately rebut the PDRS
using the second methodology in Ogilvie without showing a complete inability to be rehabilitated.
However, as that issue was not considered to be before the court, it did not make a finding on
that issue.
The decision in Dahl is likely to result in a dramatic reduction in cases where rebuttal under
Ogilvie is an option. By focusing on the ability to be rehabilitated, rather than on the development
of an alternative DFEC, the court of appeal has narrowed the legal landscape to those employees
whose injury results in either a significant impairment in their ability to be rehabilitated or possibly
only to those whose ability to benefit from rehabilitation has been eliminated.
The decision in Dahl is also a reminder not to attempt an Ogilvie rebuttal in every case that
“comes close to a life pension standard adjusted rating.” Practitioners should consider whether
alternative ratings methods under Guzman III or on occupational group would be more effective in
raising a permanent disability rating, such as the 59% rating in Dahl, to a life pension level. “Best
practices dictate that Method 2 under LeBoeuf should be used only when the applicant is not able
to be rehabilitated due to the industrial injury and has significant diminished future earning
capacity, or none at all.” Whether it’s Method 1, 2, or 3 under LeBoeuf, “[a]lways individualize the
expert witness information to the applicant first and then compare his or her post-injury earning
capacity to similarly situated employees using EDD data” [Rassp, “Rebutting the DFEC
Adjustment Factor: Ogilvie Revisited,” LexisNexis Workers’ Compensation eNewsletter, Oct. 19,
2015].
What about injuries that occur on or after 1/12013? Are the Dahl and Ogilvie cases still relevant?
“Method 2 under Ogilvie using the LeBoeuf case is still viable for cases where the injured worker
is permanently totally disabled and cannot be rehabilitated because of the industrial injury. ■
For the purpose of this article and our analysis, assume that Ogilvie injured her back and right knee as a
Muni bus driver for 17 years and had to retire on a disability retirement due to her injuries. Believe it or not,
the facts will prove to be good in terms of how this case may turn out for Ms. Ogilvie when her attorneys try
again to rebut the DFEC adjustment. We will show you how and why.
Page 12 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
HERE IS WHAT THE COURT OF APPEAL SAID
In summary, the Court of Appeal reversed the WCAB and concluded as follows:
Thus we conclude that an employee may challenge the presumptive scheduled percentage of
permanent disability prescribed to an injury by showing a factual error in the calculation of a factor in
the rating formula, or application of the formula, the omission of medical complications aggravating the
employee’s disability in preparation of the rating schedule, or by demonstrating that due to industrial
injury the employee is not amenable to rehabilitation and therefore has suffered a greater loss of future
earning capacity than reflected in the scheduled rating.
First, the Court of Appeal explained how the WCAB rejected the three proposed methods of rebutting the
diminished future earning capacity adjustment tables (Tables A and B in the 2005 PDRS, located in Section
3, pages 1-5 through 1-8). The WCAB adopted use of the RAND formula that formed the basis of the eight
DFEC adjustment categories and allowed rebuttal of a schedule DFEC adjustment by using evidence of an
injured worker’s actual post-injury wage loss, the wage data of a control group over the same period and
the WPI to wage loss ratio compared to the scheduled one.
The Court of Appeal cites the language in Brodie v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2007) 40 Cal. 4th 1313,
57 Cal. Rptr. 3d 644, 72 Cal. Comp. Cases 565, 156 P.3d 1100], and asserts that: “A permanent disability
is the irreversible residual of a work-related injury that causes impairment in earning capacity, impairment in
the normal use of a member or a handicap in the open labor market.” The Court of Appeal then again cites
Brodie and states: “Payments for permanent disability are designed to compensate an injured employee
both for physical loss and reduction in earning capacity.” Then the Court of Appeal talks about how the law
originally was meant to compensate an injured worker for loss of ability to compete in the open labor
market.
The changes in the law from SB 899 altered Labor Code § 4660 to eliminate the language referring to loss
of ability to compete in the open labor market to new language in Labor Code § 4660(a) that now requires a
permanent disability award give consideration to an injured employee’s “diminished future earning
capacity.” The Court of Appeal then astonishingly concludes that this is a distinction without a difference—
that “loss of ability to compete in the open labor market” is the same thing as “diminished future earning
capacity” and that they are “interchangeable.”
The Court of Appeal goes to pains to indicate that the terms have been used interchangeably in case law
prior to the enactment of SB 899. Then the Court of Appeal concludes:
Indeed the terms “diminished future earning capacity” and “ability to compete in an open labor market”
suggest to us no meaningful difference, and nothing in SB 899 suggests that the Legislature intended
to alter the purpose of an award of permanent disability through this change of phrase. Nor does its
use suggest that a party seeking to rebut a permanent disability rating must make any particular
showing.
The Court of Appeal then points out that Labor Code § 4660(b)(2) mandates that an employee’s diminished
future earning capacity “shall be a numeric formula based on empirical data and findings” as developed by
the RAND Institute. The Court of Appeal then states:
The language of section 4660 provides no alternative means to take into account the diminished
earning capacity of an employee as a factor in rating a permanent disability. While the rating schedule
is to be “prima facie evidence of the percentage of permanent disability to be attributed to each injury
covered by the schedule” (section 4660 subd. (c)), there is no indication some other measure may be
substituted for the earning capacity component in order to arrive at an overall rating most suitable for a
particular employee. In considering the Legislature’s intent to “promote consistency, uniformity and
objectivity” in permanent disability awards, we see nothing ambiguous or unclear in section 4660’s
directive that the earning capacity adjustment factor “shall be” the numeric formula based upon the
RAND Institute’s report. It must be initially applied.
This paragraph, quoted from the Court of Appeal, will become the keystone for rebutting the DFEC
adjustment factor as more fully described below. The Court of Appeal then points out that there is case law
over the past 41 years that allows a party two ways to rebut a scheduled rating “unchanged by passage of
SB 899.”
Page 13 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
The first way is “when a party can show a factual error in the application of a formula or the preparation of
the schedule.” The Court of Appeal then cited cases where either the disability was not “scheduled” or
where the employee’s duties did not match a scheduled occupational group. We know, for example, that
disabilities to upper extremities were not scheduled under the 1988 and 1997 PDRS. The DEU came up
with consensus ratings for upper extremity injuries that were not successfully challenged in court. The Court
of Appeal then states:
A challenge to an employee’s presumptive disability rating thus appears to remain permissible on the
basis that the schedule, or one of its component factors, was incorrectly calculated or applied.
So any party can still challenge and rebut a scheduled rating.
Then the Court of Appeal gets interesting by applying these principles of old case law to a potential rebuttal
of a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor by saying:
The possibility an employee can demonstrate such an error in the earning capacity adjustment factor is
more than theoretical, particularly in cases like this one involving a back injury.
The Court of Appeal then specifically cites the RAND Institute for Civil Justice 2004 working paper [see
http://tinyurl.com/3od4799] that shows the relationship between permanent disability ratings to wage loss
data. The document can be accessed publicly at the RAND Institute for Civil Justice website by searching
for “Data for Adjusting Disability Ratings to Reflect Diminished Future Earnings and Capacity In Compliance
With SB 899.” In the working paper, as it is called, the researchers pointed out certain flaws in their data
that would affect how the DFEC adjustments were actually calculated and upon which their data were
based. Remember, the DEU used this data to develop the 2005 PDRS. As to Ms. Ogilvie's back injury the
Court of Appeal specifically states:
The [RAND] working paper also makes certain assumptions that are critical when the diminished
earning capacity ratings are applied to back injuries (citing pages 10–12 of the working paper). If any of
the assumptions are incorrect, the estimated ratings could be biased.
The Court of Appeal then says:
A challenge to the ratings schedule on the basis that there was a factual error in the calculation of one
of its component factors, or it was incorrectly applied in a particular case does not undermine the
schedule’s “consistency, uniformity, and objectivity.”
The Court of Appeal cites “Guzman III” [Milpitas Unified School Dist. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837] and reaffirms
that any aspect of a permanent disability rating can be rebutted and the DFEC adjustment is not subject to
a conclusive presumption.
Next, the Court of Appeal addresses the second way prior case law allows rebuttal of a scheduled
permanent disability rating and that is if the claim is that the injured worker cannot be rehabilitated. The
Court of Appeal specifically affirms that the principles of LeBoeuf [LeBoeuf v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(1983) 34 Cal. 3d 234, 193 Cal. Rptr. 547, 48 Cal. Comp. Cases 587, 666 P.2d 989] apply and live under
the 2005 PDRS and despite the use of the AMA Guides:
Another way the cases have long recognized that a scheduled rating has been effectively rebutted is
when the injury to the employee impairs his or her rehabilitation, and for that reason, the employee’s
diminished future earning capacity is greater than reflected in the employee’s scheduled rating.
Didn’t someone who briefed the Court of Appeal tell the justices that no one receives vocational
rehabilitation any longer? Nevertheless, the Court of Appeal limits application of the principles of LeBoeuf to
the most widely accepted view of the Supreme Court’s holding in that case:
… and that which appears to be most frequently applied by the WCAB, is to limit its application to
cases where the employee’s diminished future earnings are directly attributable to the employee’s work
related injury, and not due to nonindustrial factors such as general economic conditions, illiteracy,
proficiency to speak English, or an employee’s lack of education.
The Court of Appeal then cites a list of writ denied cases and in footnote 7 justifies its use of writ denied
cases! It concludes that LeBoeuf lives and states:
Page 14 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
An employee effectively rebuts the scheduled rating when the employee will have a greater loss of
future earnings than reflected in a rating because, due to the industrial injury, the employee is not
amenable to rehabilitation.
The Court of Appeal then recognizes a third way to rebut a scheduled permanent disability rating:
In certain rare cases, it appears the amalgamation of data used to arrive at a diminished future earning
capacity adjustment may not capture the severity or all of the medical complications of an employee’s
work injury. A scheduled rating may be rebutted when a claimant can demonstrate that the nature or
severity of the claimant’s injury is not captured within the sampling of disabled workers that was used
to compute the adjustment factor.
The Court of Appeal cites as an example of a case where an injured worker has a foot fracture that also
involves nerve damage and the scheduled DFEC adjustment did not include foot injuries with nerve
damage and this particular individual has a greater diminished future earnings loss than what types of foot
injuries were used as a basis for determination of the DFEC adjustment factor for foot injuries in the 2005
PDRS. The Court of Appeal uses the following language for this type of rebuttal to a scheduled DFEC:
In such cases, the scheduled rating should be recalculated taking into account the extent to which the
claimant’s disability has been aggravated by complications not considered within the sampling used to
compute the adjustment factor.
Here’s the funny part of this decision, where the Court of Appeal defers (punts?) to the WCAB to determine
how all of this will play out under the WCAB:
We leave it to the WCAB in the first instance to prescribe the exact method for such a recalculation that
factors the employee’s anticipated diminished earning capacity into the data used by the RAND
Institute.
We will discuss these ramifications under the Commentary below, but don’t go away, there’s more to
Ogilvie than you think.
HOW DOES THIS DECISION AFFECT YOU? A COMMENTARY
Does this decision address the rebuttal of just the scheduled DFEC adjustment factor or does it address
rebutting the entire rating string? It seems that the Court of Appeal got confused here and addresses a little
of both, without even mentioning the ultimate holding in the Court of Appeal decision in Guzman III [see 75
Cal. Comp. Cases 837] that says you can rebut a strict WPI rating.
One thing is clear, the Court of Appeal went through a lot of trouble just to do away with a method the
WCAB came up with to rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment that results in no more than an increase of a
WPI rating of 18%. That was the maximum amount of any WPI increase an injured worker would receive if
an individualized DFEC adjustment factor was calculated based on no post-injury wages under the “Ogilvie
formula.” The Court of Appeal did not address the contention of many that loss of ability to compete in the
open labor market was tied to permanent disability schedules that used work restrictions (actual and
prophylactic) while diminished future earning capacity is tied to a WPI rating from the AMA Guides to the
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment 5th Edition (“AMA Guides”), which is like comparing apples to
oranges. Diminished future earning capacity is a concept that has more empirical ramifications than “loss of
ability to compete in the open labor market” since it has been used for years in personal injury cases and
social security disability cases (see the definition of “unable to engage in any kind of substantial gainful
activities” under Federal law and you will see that it refers to total loss of future earning capacity; see 20
C.F.R. §§ 404.1571 and 404.1572 et seq.).
Moreover, since the legislature, in SB 899, eliminated the term “loss of ability to compete in the open labor
market” and substituted in “diminished future earning capacity,” didn’t the legislature do so because it
intended a different meaning than the prior language? Didn’t the Brodie and DuBois v. Workers’ Comp.
Appeals Bd. [(1993) 5 Cal. 4th 382, 20 Cal. Rptr. 2d 523, 58 Cal. Comp. Cases 286, 853 P.2d 978] cases,
cited by the Court of Appeal, also indicate that if the legislature changes the language of a statute, there
must be a reason for it? We strongly disagree with the Court of Appeal saying that the two terms are
interchangeable. In light of the use of the AMA Guides, which require the existence of permanent objective
Page 15 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
evidence of impairment, diminished future earning capacity gains more empirical meaning than a term that
was based on actual or prophylactic work restrictions and subjective complaints.
Under Ogilvie, you can now rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment one of three ways:
1. A factual error in the calculation of a factor in the rating formula or application of the formula.
2. The omission of medical complications aggravating the employee’s disability in preparation of the
rating schedule.
3. Due to the industrial injury the employee is not amenable to rehabilitation and therefore has suffered
a greater loss of future earning capacity than reflected in the scheduled rating.
The first two methods of rebutting a scheduled DFEC adjustment will require expert testimony from a DEU
rater or from someone who understands how the 2005 PDRS and proposed 2009 PDRS [see
http://tinyurl.com/3zabvdf] were developed. The third method of rebutting a scheduled DFEC adjustment
will require expert testimony of a vocational expert, as it has for years during the LeBoeuf era and beyond.
See Ch. 4 of this guidebook for a complete discussion of prosecuting or defending a case in which
permanent total disability is claimed based on the presumption of permanent total disability pursuant to
Labor Code § 4662.
The very first place you start to begin rebutting a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor is with the “plain
language” of Labor Code § 4660, which refers to “diminished future earning capacity” as follows:
4660(a) In determining the percentages of permanent disability, account shall be taken of the nature of
the physical injury or disfigurement, the occupation of the injured employee, and his or her age at the
time if the injury, consideration being given to an employee’s diminished future earning capacity. (italics
added)
(b)(2) For purposes of this section, an employee’s diminished future earning capacity shall be a
numeric formula based on empirical data and findings that aggregate the average percentage of long-
term loss of income resulting from each type of injury for similarly situated employees. The
Administrative Director shall formulate the adjusted rating schedule based on empirical data and
findings from the Evaluation of California’s Permanent Disability Rating Schedule, Interim Report
(December 2003), prepared by the RAND Institute for Civil Justice, and upon data from additional
empirical studies. (italics added)
Notice here that the statute not only refers to data obtained by the RAND Institute for Civil Justice, but also
mandates use of data from additional empirical studies. Those “additional empirical studies” exist and are
from the DEU itself, including for the first time data that compares WPI average ratings to wage loss in
2007. The DEU has continued to obtain WPI to wage loss data since then because, in reality, our workers’
compensation system provides an ongoing data mine for “additional studies.” We now have available to us,
either voluntarily from the DEU or pursuant to a Public Records Act request, the most recent WPI to wage
loss data. This data will form the basis of any new PDRS that should be updated every five years by statute
[see Labor Code § 4660(c)].
METHOD 1: FIND A FACTUAL ERROR IN THE CALCULATION OR APPLICATION OF THE DFEC IN
AN INDIVIDUAL CASE
So how do you rebut the scheduled DFEC adjustment now? You are no longer allowed to calculate an
individual DFEC adjustment factor using the “Ogilvie formula.” Instead, you need expert witness testimony
concerning the accuracy of the scheduled DFEC itself. In fact, the Court of Appeal hints how the DFEC
adjustment can be rebutted for a back injury case such as Ms. Ogilvie’s. You need to find factual errors in
the calculation of or errors in applying the scheduled DFEC adjustment in her case.
A “Method 1” rebuttal may eventually form the basis of proving eligibility for the Return to Work Fund
benefits under SB 863 and new Labor Code § 139.48 as stated in Ch. 5 of this guidebook.
In its opinion, the Court of Appeal refers you to the RAND working paper, pages 10–12. In those pages, the
authors state that they are making assumptions that may not apply in real life. First, the average permanent
disability ratings used for the spine were based on the 1988 PDRS—which were work restrictions and there
was no data based on WPI average ratings for the spine.
Page 16 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
Also, the RAND data was a combination of summary ratings for unrepresented injured workers and
consultative ratings that were litigated cases. Some of the ratings were adjusted for age and occupation,
while others were just simply permanent disability rating standards. There is a footnote in Table 5 of the
RAND Working Paper that indicates there was a 28% difference between the summary ratings and the
consultative ratings since consultative ratings are higher than summary ones since the former are litigated
cases. Here is a look at Table 5 in the RAND 2004 Working Paper, which we quote below:
There was a total of 39,198 “sample” medical reports for the “spine” evaluated in the RAND Working Paper
studies. As you can see from the first column, a “spine” had an average PD rating of 19.75% (remember,
“no heavy lifting” was a 20% PD standard under the 1988 and 1997 PDRS). So the 19.75% “average PD
rating” means that the 39,198 samples averaged about a “no heavy lifting” work restriction. The average
knee permanent disability rating based on 12,846 sample medical reports was a 14.65% based on the 1988
PDRS. Shoulders averaged 9.73% permanent disability ratings, but with only 7,358 sample reports.
The RAND data then links wage loss over three years to each part of body injured. So the second column
shows the average percent of loss wages over three years for each part of body injured. The average spine
injury resulted in a 18.45% loss of wages for three years after the date of injury. For psychiatric injuries, the
average PD rating was 22.13% with a 49.01% loss of wages over the three years post injury period.
The third column shows the average permanent disability rating per body part to wage loss ratio. The
higher the number here, the less relative wage loss due to the injured body part. So loss of vision and
injuries to hand/fingers (not grip loss) have the lowest wage loss to body part PD rating ratios, which means
these injured workers were the least impacted by their industrial injuries for their three-year post injury
wage loss. The most impacted average permanent disability rating to wage loss was for psychiatric, hearing
loss, and shoulder injuries.
This is why in the 2005 PDRS, the range of PD ratings to wage loss ratios range from .450 to 1.81. That
range was divided up into eight equal ranges resulting in Tables A and B of the 2005 PDRS and the eight
scheduled DFEC adjustment factors.
2005 PDRS
In order to understand how to rebut a rating under the 2005 PDRS for the scheduled DFEC adjustment, you
must refer to Tables A and B in the 2005 PDRS, reproduced below:
TABLE A (PAGE 1-7 PDRS)
RANGE OF RATIOS
LOW
HIGH
FEC
RANK
ADJUST
MENT
FACTOR
1.647
1.810
ONE
1.100000
1.476
1.646
TWO
1.142657
1.305
1.475
THREE
1.185714
1.134
1.304
FOUR
1.228571
0.963
1.133
FIVE
1.271429
0.792
0.962
SIX
1.314286
0.621
0.791
SEVEN
1.357143
0.450
0.620
EIGHT
1.400000
TABLE B (PAGE 1-7 PDRS)
PART OF BODY
RATIO OF
RATING
FEC
OVER WAGE LOSS
RANK
Page 17 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
HAND/FINGERS
1.810
ONE
VISION
1.810
ONE
KNEE
1.570
TWO
OTHER
1.530
TWO
ANKLE
1.520
TWO
ELBOW
1.510
TWO
GRIP LOSS
1.280
FOUR
WRIST
1.210
FOUR
TOES
1.110
FIVE
SPINE (THORACIC)
1.100
FIVE
GENERAL LOWER
EXTREM
1.100
FIVE
SPINE LUMBAR
1.080
FIVE
SPINE CERVICAL
1.060
FIVE
HIP
1.035
FIVE
GENERAL UPPER
EXTREMITY
1.000
FIVE
HEART DISEASE
0.970
FIVE
ABDOMINAL
0.950
SIX
PTSD
0.930
SIX
LUNG
0.790
SEVE
N
SHOULDER
0.740
SEVE
N
HEARING
0.610
EIGHT
PSYCHE
0.450
EIGHT
Did you notice that in Table B there is no part of body that appears under a “Rank Three?” We don’t know
why.
When you look at Table 5 of the RAND Working Paper and Tables A and B of the 2005 PDRS, you can see
the following issues:
1. The average PD ratings are based on the 1988 PDRS work restrictions and not on WPI ratings from
the AMA Guides 5th Edition.
2. The average permanent disability ratings for the lumbar, thoracic, and cervical spine are lumped into
one category for “spine” even though the data for average PD rating and wage loss are different for
each spinal region.
3. Remember, the 1988 and 1997 PDRS did not provide separate ratings for lumbar, thoracic, and
cervical spine like the AMA Guides require.
4. The sample size for many of the body parts may not be statistically significant, e.g., the heart (353
reports evaluated), hip (475 reports evaluated), and lung/pulmonary (264 reports evaluated).
Statistical significance means that the data can lead to generalized knowledge for the entire
population.
5. The “average permanent disability ratings” were only averages and did not account for wage loss for
more severe injuries for each body part since there is a correlation between severity of injuries and
permanent disability ratings as well as another correlation between permanent disability ratings
and wage loss.
6. The average permanent disability for each body part and wage loss associated with that body part
did not account for medical complications.
7. The EDD data may have omitted wage loss from small businesses and only included average wages
for occupations from large companies and the public sector.
Page 18 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
8. The proportional wage loss should have been calculated three years from a permanent and
stationary date and not from the date of injury.
In fact, the authors of the RAND Working Paper acknowledge these pitfalls of their own research. The
hallmark of any good researcher is to publicly recognize the shortcomings of one’s data and the
conclusions drawn therefrom. The RAND data made some assumptions in coming to their conclusions
using the rating to proportional wage loss ratios:
1. Their data assumes summary ratings and consultative ratings are the same with the same frequency
of different kinds of injuries resulting in the same wage loss.
2. Their data assumes PD to wage loss proportions are the same across different regions of the spine.
3. There may be differences between proportional earnings losses and PD ratings for each spinal
region.
4. The relationship between wage loss and body parts match fairly closely, but the relationship between
the two may not always apply with various parts of body.
5. Using the 1988 PDRS results in the same DFEC adjustments for each of the three spinal regions,
but the adjustments may be different if another variable controls for severity, such as an average
WPI rating for each region.
6. The sample size for many parts of body, including the spine, are terribly low. For example, the DEU
survey was for three days (beginning July 1, 2004) that were all old PDRS.
7. The constant used to establish relativity between parts of body and proportional wage losses to
create the DFEC rankings had to be set at some baseline impairment, and it will never be known if
that baseline is accurate. This baseline comparison formed the basis of the RAND formula on
which the DEU based the 2005 PDRS.
8. Ideally, the proportional wage loss would be compared to actual WPI ratings and not those based on
average work restrictions.
9. “However, without any additional data that would allow a closer comparison between the earnings
losses in the RAND data with AMA Guides ratings, the data here provide the best means with
which to adjust disability ratings to reflect the long term loss of earnings capacity by injured
workers.”
The second problem with the RAND data that formed the basis of the 2005 PDRS is that the average
permanent disability ratings used for the “spine” were lumped together for cervical, thoracic, and lumbar,
even though wage loss was greater for lumbar injuries. Third, these average wage loss numbers are based
on “average” spine injuries and do not reflect an accurate wage loss data on severe spine injuries, such as
failed lumbar syndrome, post fusion surgeries, or spinal surgeries to different sub-regions of the spine, or
multiple spinal surgeries to the same sub-region. It is interesting to note that in a recent social security
disability case in which this author represents the claimant, a physician testified on behalf of the U.S.
government that the vast majority of people who have more than one surgery to the lumbar spine
statistically do not return to work at all.
The DFEC adjustment factor of five in the 2005 PDRS is flawed because it is based on obsolete data and
on the 1988 PDRS, which were much higher permanent disability rating standards than what has emerged
from the AMA Guides both on a strict rating basis and under alternative ratings using principles of Almaraz-
Guzman II [see 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 1084]. According to the RAND data, the average permanent disability
rating for all spine injuries was 19.70% under the 1998 PDRS looking at 39,198 ratings. The average PD
rating for lumbar spine cases was 20.93%, cervical 16.05%, and thoracic 16.80%.
The higher PD ratings using work restrictions skewed the post injury wage loss to an artificially low PD to
wage loss ratios when compared to WPI ratings to wage loss ratios for the same “average” spine injuries.
We know that WPI ratings, though separate for lumbar, cervical, and thoracic spine injures, are much lower
than 19.70%, even with adjustments under modified WPI ratings from Almaraz-Guzman, especially using
strict DRE and ROM methods of evaluation.
Page 19 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
What about wage loss ratios? Proportional wage loss data is based on the following:
Three-year earnings loss
Three year pre-injury earnings (Based on EDD data)
So, for
exampl
e:
$50,000.00 three year earnings loss =
67% wage loss ratio
$150,000.00 three year pre-injury
earnings
Proportional PD to wage
loss ratio is:
average PD (or
average WPI rating)
Proportional wage loss
Page 1-4 of the 2005 PDRS states at item 4: “The formula for calculating the maximum and minimum
adjustment factors is ([1.81/a] × .1) + 1 where a equals the minimum or maximum rating/wage loss ratio
from Table B.” Then the 2005 PDRS states: “AMA WPI ratings for injury categories that correspond to a
greater relative loss of earning capacity will receive a higher FEC adjustment.” What is wrong with this last
sentence? While the actual assertion is technically true, it is a bold faced lie because there are no WPI
ratings involved at all in the 2005 PDRS!
So Ms. Ogilvie needs an expert witness to bring all of this up. Do not call us, call a rater.
In
addition,
the
former
Administrative
Director
had
proposed
a
new
2009
PDRS
[see
http://tinyurl.com/3zabvdf] that for the first time used WPI ratings to post injury wage loss data. Guess
what? The scheduled DFEC adjustment factor for spinal injuries went from a DFEC Rank 5 to a DFEC
adjustment Rank 8! Why? Because the WPI ratings to wage loss ratios were completely different from
those of the work restrictions to wage loss ratios. The 2009 PDRS was not adopted by the prior
Administrative Director for political reasons and would have increased PD awards by an average of 16%
above those awarded under the 2005 PDRS.
To help you understand, Ms. Ogilvie has a scheduled DFEC adjustment Rank 5, which means her WPI
rating would be increased by 27.1429%. Under the proposed 2009 PDRS [see http://tinyurl.com/3zabvdf],
which is based on more recent data and uses WPI ratings instead of work restriction ratings, her WPI rating
for her back injury would be increased by 50%.
Current WPI to wage loss data can be obtained through the DWC itself. There are at least three reports that
document WPI ratings to wage loss ratios as early as 2007:
- “Uncompensated Wage Loss For Injured Workers With Permanent Disabilities” (May 2007)
- “Wage Loss for Injured Workers With Permanent Disabilities” (March 2007)
- “Return to Work Rates for Injured Workers With Permanent Disability” (January 2007)
While the current data is not provided directly from the RAND Institute for Civil Justice, the DWC continues
to gather WPI to wage loss data based on the RAND model. Counsel will need a DEU rater to verify current
WPI to wage loss ratios that probably are similar to those released as a basis of the proposed 2009 PDRS
[see http://tinyurl.com/3zabvdf]. Best practices will probably be to obtain testimony from a DEU rater who
participated in the development of the 2005 PDRS and/or in the ill-fated 2009 PDRS, or from one who has
access to the recent data. Here are Tables A and B from the 2009 proposed PDRS that for the first time
includes WPI to proportional wage loss data from 2007 DEU and RAND data:
You notice in column 1 of Table B that the range of WPI to proportional wage loss is between 0.498 to
2.462 (the 2005 PDRS had PD to proportional wage loss range from 0.045 to 1.81). Remember, the lower
the WPI to proportional wage loss ratio in column 1, the higher the DFEC adjustment. The eight DFEC
adjustment factors would be divided into equal ratios to comprise the 8 DFEC Ranks. Based on this data,
Ms. Ogilvie’s back WPI rating would increase by 50% under the 2007 WPI to wage loss data rather than the
27% increase under the 2005 PDRS. However, since Ms. Ogilvie had to retire, there may be other
alternative rating methods available to her, including a possible LeBoeuf rebuttal discussed below.
What about other parts of body injured besides the spine? Table 5 of the RAND working paper lists average
permanent disability ratings (some standards and some adjusted for age and occupation) for other body
Page 20 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
parts—e.g., grip loss average PD was 11.21% PD, knees were 14.65%, shoulder was 9.73%, wrist was
13.15%, psychiatric was 22.13%.
This brings up a word to the wise—if you are handling a case that involves significant post permanent and
stationary wage loss and the body part involves primarily eyes, toes, hearing, respiratory/lung, heart, hip,
soft tissue, and post traumatic head syndrome, bear in mind that as of the proposed 2009 PDRS [see
http://tinyurl.com/3zabvdf], there was insufficient wage loss data due to a lack of enough cases to be
statistically significant for general application. In the instructions to the proposed 2009 PDRS, the DEU
explains [see http://tinyurl.com/3zabvdf]:
Various injury categories in Table B do not list a ratio of average standard ratings to proportional wage
loss. These injury categories, which together account for less than 3% of all ratings, include eyes, toes,
hearing, respiratory/lungs, heart, hip, soft tissue, and post-traumatic head syndrome. Empirical data
does not exist to establish a valid statistical sample of standard ratings under the January 2005 PDRS
for these injury categories. They remain in the same DFEC rank as they were initially assigned under
the 2005 PDRS.
So the bottom line is, in order to rebut the scheduled DFEC adjustment in these cases, you need to use the
same formula that RAND used to establish the 8 DFEC ranks, but to make the argument through expert
testimony that a given assigned rank is invalid. Ms. Ogilvie has that argument in her case since she had to
retire due to her back injury. In addition, Ms. Ogilvie’s case is rated under the AMA Guides and the 2005
PDRS does not provide a DFEC adjustment factor based on WPI ratings to proportional wage loss ratios.
With more recent DFEC data as reflected in the proposed 2009 PDRS and perhaps with even more recent
proportional wage loss data, she may well qualify for a DFEC Rank 8 under the 2009 proposed PDRS even
through it was not officially adopted by the prior Administrative Director. However, if the data is the most
accurate currently under the proposed 2009 PDRS, she should ask for a category 8, 50% increase in the
WPI rating for the lumbar spine since the published data used for the 2009 proposed PDRS is more
accurate than the data that formed the basis of the DFEC Rank 5 under the 2005 PDRS.
This conclusion would be consistent with the Court of Appeal’s opinion that you have to use the DFEC
based RAND empirical data and nothing else, but you can point out a factual error in the calculation of a
factor in the rating formula or an error in the application of the formula. The error here is that Ms. Ogilvie’s
permanent disability to her lumbar spine falls under the AMA Guides and not the work restrictions or 1988
PDRS upon which the RAND data and 2005 PDRS were based.
METHOD 2: THERE IS NO SUCH THING AS AN “AVERAGE” INJURY
The second method of rebutting a DFEC adjustment with medical complications that do not reflect the
“average” body part injured, is problematic. Again, counsel will need expert testimony from a witness who is
familiar on how an “average PD rating” for back injuries was calculated in arriving at the scheduled DFEC
adjustments. We know that the 2005 PDRS was based on 241,000 cases, of which some were PD
standard ratings and others were adjusted for age and occupation. We don’t know the severity of the
injuries that formed the basis of the “average.”
We don’t know the range of minimal to most severe either—we don’t know how wide two standard
deviations are that form the average in the middle of the data. As stated above, the RAND data did not
divide “spine” ratings by severity—there are not separate DFEC categories for failed lumbar syndrome,
fusions, multi-level fusions, fusions to the neck and low back on the same injured worker, etc. You get the
point. The 2005 PDRS does not account for proportional wage loss for people whose injuries are one or
more standard deviations above the average. For that matter, nor does the 2005 PDRS account for one or
more standard deviations below the average (such as the bank president with a bad back who loses a
minimal amount of earnings caused by the injury).
In fact, the DFEC adjustment for knee injuries only covers the average proportional loss of wages for
average knee injuries. Shouldn’t there be separate proportional wage loss data for cases involving people
who have had a total knee replacement? What about cases where there is no specific listed DFEC
adjustment? A recent case comes to mind of a foot/ankle inter-articular chondral defect (a hole in the ankle
joint lining). There was no specific AMA Guides rating for it, so the AME had to improvise (40% foot
Page 21 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
impairment due to surgery and bone on bone in the hole despite surgery, which is a 28% lower extremity
rating and an 11% WPI rating). The DFEC adjustment for a “foot” is a category 2. Since the injured worker
has trouble walking and he had to apply for social security disability and cannot work as a mechanical
engineer, shouldn’t the case fall into a higher DFEC adjustment rank? We cannot imagine the “average”
foot permanent disability rating used to calculate the DFEC adjustment included injuries like this one.
If your head is spinning, you will not be alone. You will be begging for return of the algebra of the Ogilvie
formula! We don’t know how the WCAB will allow trial judges to determine the DFEC if there is a finding
that the data did not include severe injuries in the calculation of what an average injury rates. However,
data mining for proportional wage loss to specific WPI ratings is relatively easy to obtain. The PDRS rating
code for a total knee replacement is 17.05.10.08 and is based on Tables 17-35 and 17-33 Diagnosis Based
Estimate. All the DEU needs to do is to link this code to wage loss data and you have a fairly accurate
picture of proportional wage loss data for patients who have knee replacements. This is much more
valuable than an average rating for all knee injuries. All knee injuries under the 2005 PDRS are assigned a
DFEC scheduled adjustment of Rank 2. But what WPI to proportional wage loss ratios occur when you
capture all total knee replacements, or all lumbar fusions, or all repeat lumbar surgeries, or cases involving
lumbar and cervical fusion surgeries?
Under the second method of rebutting a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor, medical complications may
occur with any part of body injured, and the Court of Appeal made up one involving a fractured foot with a
nerve injury as part of it. The Court of Appeal did not even discuss the fact that a strict WPI rating for a
fractured foot is minimal to begin with—see Table 17-33, which has a scheduled WPI rating for a fractured
foot of up to 4% WPI. Any nerve damage from a fractured foot may add 3–4% WPI at a maximum based on
standard strict ratings. However, impairments for station and gait due to chronic pain may rate up to 60%
WPI under Table 13-15 (see pages 336 and Section 13.8 on page 343 of the AMA Guides).
A DFEC adjustment factor for a foot injury in the 2005 PDRS is a Rank 2. We don’t know what an “average”
foot injury was that formed the basis of the scheduled DFEC adjustment, and we don’t know how a rater
would change the DFEC Rank based on a severe foot injury. However, it is safe to say that the injured
worker had better have a good reason why his or her future earning capacity has been severely diminished.
Perhaps the DEU should not lump all body part injuries under one DFEC Rank, taking only the average
WPI or PD rating that exists for all of them. A more accurate DFEC adjustment ranking should be based on
greater than average ratings for a given body part if the injury and wage loss from it are also greater than
average. Hopefully, the DEU and other experts will be ready, willing, and able to provide testimony on how
an “above-average” back or knee injury impacts future earning capacity based on empirical data that is
currently available. This is possible without any fancy algebra on anyone’s part.
Counsel may also want to develop the record for an evaluating or treating physician to indicate that a given
injury to a specific part of body is more severe than an average injury to that body part. After all, the DCA in
Ogilvie III never defined what it meant by its use of the term “medical complications.” You should ask the
treating or evaluating physician, “Were there any medical complications that caused an increase in
disability than an average [part of body, e.g., back] injury would?”
THE THIRD METHOD—LeBOEUF RESURRECTED
Under the third method of rebutting a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor, we are already familiar with
cases falling under Labor Code § 4662 where the injured worker’s permanent disability rating is less than
100%, but the rating is such that the injured worker has effectively a total loss of future earning capacity,
“based on the fact.”
During the Ogilvie case, counsel brought up the case of a farm worker who suffers a back injury and
effectively loses all ability to work on a farm and completely loses his livelihood, not due to language
difficulties or to lack of education but because of a back injury at work. The point from the Court of Appeal is
that you can rebut not only the scheduled DFEC adjustment factor, but the whole permanent disability
rating string. This requires use of a vocational expert, and we would contend, still requires utilizing the
Montana criteria [see (1962) 57 Cal. 2d 589, 21 Cal. Rptr. 545, 27 Cal. Comp. Cases 130, 371 P.2d 281]
Page 22 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
that the WCAB discussed in Ogilvie I [see 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 248]. See Ch. 7, § 7.08 in this guidebook
for the Montana criteria.
Does the Court of Appeal hint that you even need to prove that the injured worker has sustained a
significant loss of earnings in the three years post injury, or post permanent and stationary/MMI date? The
Court of Appeal is silent on this issue, and counsel should at least try to introduce evidence of the
applicant’s post P&S earnings if you want to rebut the scheduled DFEC due to medical complications from
an injury or if there is an error in the calculations of the scheduled DFEC or error in the application of the
DFEC. You must present evidence that the injured worker had no earning capacity at all and cannot be
vocationally rehabilitated if you want to rebut the scheduled DFEC adjustment factor under the LeBoeuf-
resurrected third method.
The Court of Appeal was very careful to indicate that you cannot take into account an injured employee’s
lack of ability to speak or write English, a lack of education or other factors that are not caused by the
employer in determining a permanent disability rating under an “Ogilvie-LeBoeuf” rebuttal case. It remains
to be seen whether the “Ogilvie-LeBoeuf” rebuttal method will be used in low PD cases or if it will be used
sparingly—when a rating is approaching a life pension of 70% adjusted permanent disability rating or if an
injured worker’s rating is close to 100% and the injured worker has a total loss of future earning capacity.
WARNING:
Practitioners should take note of the Dahl case, in which the court of appeal held that both Ogilvie
and LeBouef required consideration of the effect of the injury on the employee’s injury to be
rehabilitated as the threshold issue, not simply whether there was a different calculation as to the
employee’s diminished earning capacity [see Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. (Dahl) (2015) 240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119]. For further discussion, see
above. ■
CONCLUSION
The Court of Appeal is allowing parties to rebut the scheduled DFEC adjustment factor in a given case, but
without the “Ogilvie formula.” What is important about this decision, like that of the 6th District Court of
Appeal decision in Guzman III [see 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837], is that both courts have concluded that we
need to rate cases individually for permanent disability—one size does not fit all. Case law supports the
notion that permanent disability is personal to an injured worker and that compensation for that disability
should also be individualized. In fact, this trend is continuing for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013
under SB 863.
Here is specifically what the DCA said in summary of its own decision in Ogilvie III:
To rebut the application of the rating schedule on the basis that the scheduled earning capacity
adjustment is incorrect, the employee must demonstrate an error in the earning capacity formula, the
data or the result derived from the data in formulating the earning capacity adjustment. Alternatively, an
employee may rebut a scheduled rating by showing that the rating was incorrectly applied or the
disability reflected in the rating schedule is inadequate in light of the effect of the employee’s industrial
injury.
The Court of Appeal’s decision in Ogilvie is interesting for what is missing from it. The decision addresses
injured workers who want to rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment. The Court of Appeal did not address
whether or not employers can rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment to a lower DFEC rank by showing
evidence of no or reduced loss of future earning capacity, such as a sheriff deputy who misses two years
from work after being declared permanent and stationary, but returns to work with full salary and a raise.
Is the Court of Appeal’s decision “confusing?” No, it actually is practical when it comes to development of
the record, if you have the right facts and a credible DEU rater or other rating expert witness. Vocational
experts still have a say under the third method of rebuttal, which is really a rebuttal of the entire rating string
and not just the scheduled DFEC adjustment factor.
Page 23 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
Unfortunately, some of the Court of Appeal’s logic is questionable, especially the resurrection of LeBoeuf,
since recent WCAB panel decisions have distinguished between legal definitions of loss of ability to
compete in the open labor market and associated that with work restrictions, while diminished earning
capacity is associated with permanent objective and empirical evidence of WPI ratings for impairment
under the AMA Guides.
We are sure that this is not the end of the Ogilvie and DFEC adjustment question—we may end up with
cases in other Courts of Appeal where use of the Ogilvie formula rebuttal of a scheduled DFEC adjustment
factor may be upheld. We also do not know why the DCA did not address the question of whether a
defendant can rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor when the injured worker has apparently suffered
no diminished future earning capacity. Certainly, a defendant could argue that a lower DFEC Rank exists in
a given case based on the 2007 WPI rating to proportional wage loss ratio data. Time will tell.
We have seen very few cases that utilized rebuttal of the DFEC adjustment factor under the 2005 PDRS. It
is clear that very few people understand how to put Ogilvie III into practice. The only practical application of
Ogilvie III has been the common use of LeBoeuf to rebut the entire rating string and try to obtain a 100%
permanent and total disability award for cases that fall under 100% disability under the AMA Guides and
the 2005 PDRS. We have seen some attempts at obtaining a higher rating using LeBoeuf to go from say, a
40% disability to a 70% disability with varying amounts of success. To date, there is no published decision
on whether this type of rebuttal is valid, allowed, or based on substantial evidence.
In one case handled by the author, the “Method 1” rebuttal was used in a spinal injury case where the strict
rating string was 45% permanent disability. The parties settled the case for a 60% stipulated permanent
disability on the day of trial once the defendant, the WCJ, and the adjuster understood the reasoning
behind the bold assertion that the 2005 PDRS was not based on WPI to proportionate wage loss but was
based on average work restrictions under the 1998 PDRS. The WCJ had indicated that he would admit into
evidence the WPI to proportional wage loss data (Tables A and B) of the proposed but not adopted 2009
PDRS as it was similar to admitting into evidence the 2004 medical treatment fee schedule for disputed bills
for services rendered prior to 1/1/2004.
WARNING:
Practitioners should take note of the Dahl case, in which the court of appeal held that both Ogilvie
and LeBouef required consideration of the effect of the injury on the employee’s injury to be
rehabilitated as the threshold issue, not simply whether there was a different calculation as to the
employee’s diminished earning capacity [see Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals
Bd. (Dahl) (2015) 240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119]. For further discussion, see
above. ■
[c] Ogilvie Glossary
We are including some remnants of the “Ogilvie Formula” that may assist you in understanding an “Ogilvie
III” rebuttal using the LeBoeuf case when the applicant cannot be vocationally rehabilitated. The following
terms may still be used by vocational experts in determining whether an injured worker falls within the third
rebuttal method under the DCA decision:
“Individual’s proportional earnings loss”—May no longer rebut the DFEC scheduled rating.
“E/E’s actual earnings”—Three years or other period post date of injury. Does not include TTD, EDD,
VRMA, permanent disability benefits, social security benefits. This issue will still probably apply under the
third rebuttal method from the DCA decision, a LeBoeuf rebuttal. However, earnings loss after a permanent
and stationary date is probably more reliable evidence of diminished future earning capacity than three
years post injury.
“Earnings of similarly situated employees”—Same period as injured worker post injury, what the injured
worker would have earned had there been no injury. Based on EDD or other wage data, such as a union
Page 24 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
negotiated wage schedule. This is also called the “control group.” This probably is no longer relevant to an
“Ogilvie III rebuttal” under the DCA decision. However, it may be relevant to present evidence of what the
applicant could have earned had he or she not been injured on the job under a LeBoeuf rebuttal.
“Employee’s estimated earnings loss”—Formula of same or similar employee’s wages minus injured
employee’s post injury wages: SS E/E minus injured E/E post injury wages:
(SS E/E earnings – E/E post injury earnings = E/E estimated earnings loss)
This is probably better now defined as a comparison between what the applicant’s earnings loss were post
permanent and stationary date compared to what he or she could have earned if there had been no
industrial injury. A vocational expert would have to present this evidence.
“Employee’s proportional earnings loss”—Injured E/E wages loss divided by SS E/E wages (or what the
injured worker would have earned absent the industrial injury during the same period).
Injured E/E wage loss
= ?
SS E/E wages
“Individual’s WPI rating to loss ratio”—Use this number to see if you can rebut the 2005 PDRS DFEC:
WPI
= ?
ESTIMATED
PROPORTIONAL LOSS
This is no longer used under an Ogilvie III rebuttal.
“Individualized rating to proportional earnings loss ratio”—also known as “ILR:”
This is no longer used for an Ogilvie III rebuttal.
The information provided below may be useful in presenting a LeBoeuf rebuttal under the third method of
rebutting a scheduled DFEC adjustment under Ogilvie III:
• You can also obtain earnings of the same or similarly situated employees by obtaining union contract
agreements, memorandum of understanding or other written evidence of what the same or
similarly situated employees would have earned during the same period of time as the injured
worker would have earned post injury.
• Whoever has the burden of rebutting a scheduled rating under the 2005 PDRS has the burden of
proof as to what the injured worker’s earnings were three years (or other period) post injury and as
to what the same or similarly situated employees would have earned during the same period.
• In addition, counsel for injured workers is encouraged to produce evidence of the injured worker’s pre-
injury earnings by way of W-2 forms showing three or four calendar years of pre-injury earnings.
This will establish an injured worker’s pre-injury earning capacity.
We are providing some basic information for you to understand how to calculate a person’s diminished
future earning capacity based on historical data. However, this information is limited because it is
speculative as to how much actual loss of future earnings will occur as time passes. Again, this information
is provided only as part of a LeBoeuf rebuttal under Ogilvie III.
• E.G. IW EARNS $25,000.00 DURING 3 YEARS POST INJURY; SAME UNINJURED EMPLOYEES
EARNED $150,000.00
• $150,000 − $25,000 = $125,000.00, which is the IW’s earnings loss estimate.
• IW’s earnings loss estimate divided by what the IW’s earnings would have been absent the industrial
injury:
FORMULA:
IW EARNINGS LOSS
= ?
CONTROL GROUP
EARNINGS
• This equals proportional earnings loss and in the example:
 $125,000 divided by $150,000 = .833333
Page 25 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
$
1
2
5,
0
0
0
 = .833333 proportionate loss
ratio
$
1
5
0,
0
0
0
(This means the IW has lost 83% of his earnings for 3 years). Can this be used in a LeBoeuf rebuttal?
Maybe yes and maybe no, depending on how the WCAB accepts evidence of diminished future earning
capacity for someone who cannot be rehabilitated. Under SB 863 for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013,
we do not know if this method could be used to rebut the 1.4 adjustment factor that applies to all WPI
ratings. Alternatively, this method may become relevant to eligibility for the new Return to Work Fund based
on a permanent disability award that is disproportionately low compared to the loss of future earnings for an
injured worker.
[4] Practice Tips
WARNING:
Practitioners should take note of the Dahl case, in which the court of appeal held that both Ogilvie and
LeBouef required consideration of the effect of the injury on the employee’s injury to be rehabilitated as
the threshold issue, not simply whether there was a different calculation as to the employee’s
diminished earning capacity [see Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl) (2015)
240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119]. For further discussion, see § 7.06[4][d], above. ■
Counsel needs to evaluate every case to determine whether or not to rebut a rating under the 2005 PDRS. The
Guzman III and Ogilvie III cases allow any party to rebut a rating from the 2005 PDRS for any of the
components of the PDRS, including the WPI rating, the DFEC adjustment factor, age, and occupation. We have
not seen any litigation over the injured worker’s age at the time of injury, but historically we have litigated the
other three components of every PDRS. Hypothetically, in a single case, a party could present evidence under
Guzman III for the WPI rating under the AMA Guides, present evidence of one of the three rebuttal methods for
the scheduled DFEC adjustment factor in Ogilvie III and present evidence on the injured worker’s occupational
variant. You can present evidence in the same case to rebut three out of four components of a 2005 PDRS
scheduled rating.
For injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013 counsel can rebut the WPI rating, may be able to rebut the 1.4
adjustment factor using one of the methods in Ogilvie III, and can rebut the injured worker’s occupation. In both
the 2005 and 2013 PDRS, the parties could rebut the entire permanent disability rating string based on Labor
Code § 4662 permanent and total disability, or based on a LeBoeuf approach.
Counsel is advised to look at the big picture in every case. Do not assume that every rating under the 2005 or
2013 PDRS needs to be rebutted in some way. Remember, the key to any rebuttal to a scheduled rating under
the 2005 or 2013 PDRS is development of the record—physician depositions and interrogatories to rebut a WPI
rating; wage and wage loss data to rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor for the third method of rebuttal
under Ogilvie III using LeBoeuf. What the DCA did not tell us in Ogilvie III is that for an injured worker to
legitimately prove post injury earnings loss, it is strongly advised that the injured worker’s pre-injury earnings be
established as part of the record. This would mean obtaining and producing the injured worker’s calendar year
earnings for each of the three or four years prior to the date of injury to help establish a pre-injury earning
capacity.
Page 26 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
How should counsel obtain an applicant’s post injury wage data? Counsel is advised to obtain reliable and
reproducible data directly through a vocational expert or from union contract agreements. Do the parties need
expert witnesses to prove same or similarly situated employee wages? If counsel for either the injured worker
or defendant wants to front the costs and expenses to a vocational expert who can present reliable and
reproducible data then that is a strategic decision. Since SB 863 mandates a vocational expert fee schedule,
these services may or may not be included in the charges for this evidence. Otherwise, a party could obtain the
data from a reliable source and present the data in the form of an exhibit, especially if the data source is a
public record or obtained through a public agency such as the EDD.
One troubling aspect of Ogilvie III LeBoeuf rebuttal is that defense counsel may want to present evidence that
an injured worker failed to mitigate damages so to speak by seeking and obtaining employment during a post-
injury period if his or her condition had been declared permanent and stationary and he or she failed to seek
employment. In other words a good faith effort on the part of the injured worker may be addressed by defense
counsel as a strategy to rebut an injured worker’s attempted rebuttal to a scheduled DFEC adjustment.
How will the DEU handle Guzman III and Ogilvie III issues? How will the DEU and judges handle injured
workers who are not represented? Is there a duty for anyone to inform an unrepresented injured worker that he
or she may be able to rebut a rating under the 2005 or 2013 PDRS by rebutting a WPI rating or scheduled
DFEC or 1.4 adjustment factor; occupational variant, or any combination of them?
Remember, the goal for any injured worker, represented by legal counsel or not, is to obtain the most accurate
rating. Judges have a duty to review the record in every case for adequacy. There is an on-going duty to
develop the record when any question about a WPI rating under the AMA Guides or a DFEC adjustment factor
arises as part of the evaluation of a case for adequacy of a settlement or for a decision after a trial [see
McDuffie v. Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority (2002) 67 Cal. Comp. Cases 138 (Appeals
Board en banc decision)].
The issue in unrepresented cases is whether by his or her choosing to be unrepresented by legal counsel that
he or she has to live with the outcome of the case as is. All judges have to decide by an independent evaluation
of the evidence in the record whether a proposed settlement is based on substantial evidence and is adequate,
and if a case goes to trial whether or not the record is complete. Under Guzman III and Ogilvie III, the WCAB
and DCA clearly said that the burden of rebutting a scheduled 2005 PDRS rating is on the party disputing the
rating. So it seems for rebutting a rating under the 2013 PDRS.
So if an unrepresented injured worker has agreed to a settlement, the judge still has to decide whether the
settlement is adequate or whether the record needs to be developed. As a practical matter, all a judge can do in
unrepresented cases is to strongly suggest that an injured worker retain an attorney since the record may need
to be developed by rebuttal of a rating. At the very least, a judge or Information and Assistance Officer has a
duty to inform an injured worker that he or she has a right to rebut a rating in the manners described by the
WCAB.
In unrepresented cases, the DEU will issue summary ratings by showing a strict rating and then will annotate
the existence of a possible Guzman III rating if a physician mentions a different or alternative rating method in
the same report or in subsequent discovery. For a consultative rating request by represented parties, the DEU
will provide the strict rating and then will also provide an Guzman III rating at the request of a party or by order
of a judge. In all formal ratings, the DEU will issue ratings based on formal rating instructions by a judge.
In an Ogilvie III rebuttal case, the DEU will issue an Ogilvie III rating only at a judge’s request. This is probably
because one party or the other would object to any rating based on the Ogilvie III rebuttal until a judge accepts
rebuttal evidence to a prima facie permanent disability rating under the 2005 PDRS with a scheduled DFEC
adjustment factor. Only in cases where the judge has accepted the Ogilvie III evidence that rebuts the
scheduled DFEC will the need arise for a formal permanent disability rating with an Ogilvie III instruction. Also,
parties may informally agree to obtain an informal rating that includes an Ogilvie III rebuttal. The WCJ and
ultimately the WCAB would only have to indicate what DFEC adjustment factor applies as a “rebuttal DFEC
adjustment” from the most accurate WPI to wage loss ratio data source, whether from the 2007 data or more
recent data.
So how do Guzman III and Ogilvie III potentially affect our law practices? There already has been increased
litigation over the WPI ratings—strict versus alternative ratings. However, it appears, at least in the short run,
Page 27 of 27
§ 7.06 Almaraz-Guzman and Ogilvie WCAB En Banc Decisions
the overall costs to employers due directly or indirectly to Guzman III and Ogilvie III is minimal. In some cases,
defense counsel may have to advise employers and their claims administrators to increase reserves on cases
where the injured employee is challenging a permanent disability rating under any PDRS, either by way of the
WPI rating, the DFEC adjustment factor, the 1.4 adjustment factor, occupational variant or any combination
thereof. The long term effect, if any, on the employer community is speculative.
In 2010, the DWC administrative director did not issue a new PDRS as mandated by Labor Code § 4660, which
requires revision of a permanent disability rating schedule “at least every five years.” Decisional case law that is
evolving in Guzman and Ogilvie will affect our law practices regardless of whether or not the administrative
director adopts a new PDRS.
The WCAB in Almaraz-Guzman I pointed out a factor that was not clarified, modified or changed in its decision
in Almaraz-Guzman II:
There is long established case law that an injured employee can rebut the schedule by showing that his or
her disability is actually higher than what the schedule would provide and, conversely, that an employer
can rebut the schedule by showing that the employee’s disability is actually lower.
In both the WCAB en banc and DCA Almaraz-Guzman decisions, the WCAB notes that this is not inconsistent
with the mandate that the schedule shall provide consistency, uniformity and objectivity under the mandate of
Labor Code § 4660(d).
So if a treating or evaluating physician provides a conclusion that an injured worker’s impairment rating is
based on a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides 5th Edition, then the burden of rebutting the strict WPI rating
will be on the injured worker. On the other hand, if a treating or evaluating physician issues an opinion that
provides a WPI rating that is based on “other chapters, tables and methods” within the four corners of the AMA
Guides 5th Edition, but which is not based on a strict interpretation, then the burden of rebutting that WPI rating
falls with the defendant employer.
Again, many times in our cases we will see a range of evidence embedded within a single medical report or
within the conclusions of one physician. The WPI rating that is the most accurate in terms of describing how an
industrial injury affects the injured worker’s ADL and work functioning impairment is the one that may rebut a
strict WPI rating. The DFEC adjustment factor that is the most accurate may rebut a scheduled DFEC
adjustment. Only the overall final permanent disability rating that is the most accurate and which is based on
the most credible and persuasive evidence wins.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.07
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.07 Rebutting a WPI Rating—Post-Almaraz-Guzman III
So what does the WCAB mean when it says that a party may rebut a strict WPI rating using only the AMA Guides
5th Edition? We know that we can only use the AMA Guides 5th Edition and no other publication or nationally
accepted standards. We know that we cannot use the language that a strict rating is disproportional, inequitable
and not a fair or accurate measure of permanent disability.
What we can do is claim that a strict WPI rating under the AMA Guides 5th Edition is not an accurate impairment
rating on a case-by-case basis. We can rebut that strict rating with the use of any other “chapter, table or method”
under the AMA Guides 5th Edition that provides a “more accurate impairment rating.” The term “accurate” is not
given in any context by the WCAB. Does the term “accurate impairment rating” refer to any relationship between the
industrial injury and the permanent effects an objective medical condition has on the injured employee’s ability to
perform ADL and work functioning? Since the goal is to provide a proper permanent disability award, the
impairment rating should bear some resemblance and have some relationship with the effects of that impairment
rating on the injured employee’s functioning, both on ADL and work activities.
The AMA Guides 5th Edition on page 2 defines “impairment” as: “a loss, loss of use, or derangement of any body
part, organ system or organ function.” The authors on page 2 then go on to say that “An impairment may lead to
functional limitations or the inability to perform activities of daily living.” The authors further state that a nationally
accepted definition of “impairment” does not exist. Finally, the authors indicate on page 4 that impairment ratings in
the AMA Guides 5th Edition “reflect the severity of the medical condition and the degree to which the impairment
decreases an individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living, excluding work.” This is perhaps why the WCAB
is comfortable allowing a more liberal use of the AMA Guides 5th Edition and permit physicians to use any chapter,
table or method within that edition in order to obtain an “accurate impairment rating.”
The following is a revised rubric for use under Guzman III in order to determine whether you should attempt to rebut
a strict WPI rating:
1. Is there evidence of a permanent objective medical condition that is caused by the industrial injury?
2. Is that objective medical condition ratable under the AMA Guides 5th Edition?
3. If not, is the objective medical condition ratable under a similar listed medical condition in the AMA Guides
5th Edition?
4. Can the physician find any other “chapter, table or method within the AMA Guides 5th Edition that most
accurately” describes the impairment in terms of WPI?
5. Is the “strict” WPI rating an accurate impairment rating for the objective medical condition that was caused by
the industrial injury?
6. Should the record be developed to determine an alternative rating that is more accurate than a “strict” WPI
rating under the AMA Guides 5th Edition?
7. Can a physician consider as part of determining an accurate WPI rating the effect of the impairment on the
injured worker’s ADL and work functioning that would affect his or her future earning capacity? Do ADLs
overlap with work functions? If so, how?
Page 2 of 3
§ 7.07 Rebutting a WPI Rating—Post-Almaraz-Guzman III
8. Which WPI rating—the strict or rebuttal—constitutes substantial evidence and, if both do, which one is the
most accurate, persuasive and credible based on the totality of the evidence?
Remember, it is no longer a question of fairness, disproportionate or inequitable permanent disability ratings. It is
now a question of accurate WPI ratings using any chapter, table or method in the AMA Guides 5th Edition. What
does the WCAB mean by use of the term “method?” The exact language the WCAB used in Almaraz-Guzman II is:
“A physician may utilize any chapter, table or method in the AMA Guides that most accurately reflects the injured
employee’s impairment.” You will see some examples in §§ 7.09–7.20, below, of creative use of the AMA Guides
that can provide a more accurate rating than a strict WPI rating provides.
Some of these “methods” are not mentioned by the authors in the AMA Guides. Physicians nonetheless utilize the
tables and figures that are within the four corners of the AMA Guides 5th Edition, but not necessarily from a
“method” that is described by the authors of the Guides in the instructions in the text of each chapter. The WCAB
will probably accept these creative “methods” that are more fully described below because of the fact that the WPI
impairment ratings are actually derived from “the four corners of the Guides” and the physician has to describe how
and why he or she is deviating from a strict WPI rating. The simple questions are always going to be: “How does an
industrial injury that results in objective medical findings cause permanent impairment of function? What WPI rating
most accurately reflects that impairment?”
When you deal with an industrial injury that involves a permanent objective medical condition that is not listed in the
AMA Guides, you must always be familiar with two extremely important quotes, one from page 11 of the AMA
Guides and the other from page 1-4 of the 2005 PDRS, second column, second paragraph:
Page 11 of the AMA Guides states in pertinent part:
In situations where impairment ratings are not provided, the Guides suggests that physicians use clinical
judgment, comparing measurable impairment resulting from the unlisted condition to measurable impairment
resulting from similar conditions with similar impairment of function in performing activities of daily living.
Page 1-4 of the 2005 PDRS states in pertinent part:
If an impairment based on an objective medical condition is not addressed by the AMA Guides, physicians
should use clinical judgment, comparing measurable impairment resulting from the unlisted objective medical
condition to measurable impairment resulting from similar objective medical conditions with similar impairment
of function in performing activities of daily living.
Here, arguably, the 2005 or 2013 PDRS allows rebuttal if an objective medical condition is not mentioned in the
AMA Guides! Remember, the important point in the analysis of every case is to identify all objective medical
findings. You must then determine whether or not any objective medical findings are permanent. Once you have
any medical condition that has permanent objective findings then there has to be some kind of impairment rating. If
there is a 0% WPI or nearly a 0% WPI and the medical condition is industrially related with objective and permanent
medical findings, then that zero or minimal rating is probably rebuttable. This is especially true if the objective
medical condition causes a permanent effect on an injured worker’s ability to perform work activities and ADJ
functions.
Also note that very few physicians are familiar with page 1-4 of the 2005 PDRS. In fact very few physicians have
read any of the instructions in the 2005 PDRS, including those that require use of clinical judgment for any objective
medical condition and with respect to not combining separate upper extremity impairment ratings because of
different FEC rankings for each upper extremity part of body [see Ch. 2, § 2.03, and Ch. 3, § 3.16 of this
guidebook].
What is so interesting about the WCAB decision in Almaraz-Guzman II is the fact that the WCAB did not provide its
definition of what constitutes “the most accurate rating.” Must the “most accurate rating” include consideration for
the effects of an impairment on ADL and work functioning to establish the most accurate WPI? It seems axiomatic
Page 3 of 3
§ 7.07 Rebutting a WPI Rating—Post-Almaraz-Guzman III
that the most accurate WPI rating would have to take into account permanent objective medical findings that cause
a reduction in an injured worker’s ADL and work functioning on a permanent basis.
Without those elements, part of the definition of “impairment” under the AMA Guides would be missing. So in
developing the record to rebut a WPI rating, counsel should always question a physician about how an industrial
injury that results in permanent objective medical findings affects that injured worker’s abilities to perform all ADL
and work functions. Perhaps this is why an alternative WPI impairment rating using other chapters, tables and
methods will be sufficient to rebut a strict rating if a physician explains, with reasonable medical probability, that an
alternative method is more accurate because it does take into account more specifically an injured worker’s
permanent impairment of ADL and work function.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.08
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.08 Rebutting a Strict Impairment Rating Based on the AMA Guides
[1] Introduction
Every attorney, judge, rater, and claims examiner should always look for objective medical findings in MMI
medical reports. Most of us have a bad habit of reading only the “Discussion” sections of MMI medical reports
and do not pay attention to operative reports or the “Physical Examination” section of reports. In order to obtain
the most accurate impairment ratings, you must pay very close attention to the diagnosis, physical examination
findings, laboratory and diagnostic studies, operative report findings and the discussion sections of every MMI
report. From those sections, you should be able to find all ratable permanent objective medical findings.
Remember, not all objective medical findings or conditions are directly listed and ratable in the AMA Guides 5th
Edition. Almaraz-Guzman II and Guzman III allow a physician to go on a treasure hunt within the four corners of
the AMA Guides 5th Edition to find WPI ratings that most accurately reflect permanent objective medical
findings.
The discussion in this section pertains to any date of injury where the 2005 or 2013 PDRS applies. This is
because SB 863 specifically permits rebuttal of a strict WPI rating in accordance with the Court of Appeal
decision in Guzman III. See Labor Code § 4660.1 for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013.
At a recent deposition of an orthopedic AME, he testified that the AMA Guides has only three chapters on
orthopedic medical conditions, but in reality, orthopedic medical conditions are more fully described in three
volumes of medical textbooks. So many orthopedic conditions are not listed in the AMA Guides at all, and
physicians constantly have to use their clinical judgment in deciding what impairment rating is the most
accurate. This is true before the Almaraz-Guzman cases even existed.
In this section, we will discuss some examples of how strict impairment ratings can be potentially rebutted. All
of these examples are from actual depositions and reports of agreed medical examiners and QME physicians.
The physicians all opined that the original strict impairment ratings under the AMA Guides were not adequate in
terms of accurately describing the effects of the work-related impairments on the injured worker’s ADL and work
functioning. In fact, all of the physicians either stated in their reports or testified in a deposition that the strict
impairment ratings were not accurate and they stated why. Their emphasis was on accuracy of the impairment
rating and not on whether the original strict impairment rating was fair, disproportionate or inequitable. This was
before Almaraz-Guzman II was issued by the WCAB on September 3, 2009 and the Guzman III case in 2010.
These examples all incorporated rebuttal of a strict impairment rating by alternative use of the chapters, tables
and methods within the AMA Guides, despite the first WCAB decision that allowed us to go outside the AMA
Guides 5th Edition from February 3, 2009, the date of that first decision through September 3, 2009, the date of
their new decision. These rebuttal reports and examples probably would be allowed by the WCAB panels and
trial level judges as long as the rebuttal evidence constitutes substantial medical evidence. The WCAB
reminded us in Almaraz-Guzman II that if both the strict impairment rating and the alternative rebuttal
impairment rating are substantial evidence, then the trial judge and the WCAB could utilize the range of
evidence doctrine or choose which impairment rating that is the most accurate, credible and persuasive [see
Klee v. Workers’ Comp. App. Bd. (1989) 211 Cal. App. 3d 1519, 54 Cal. Comp. Cases 251; Robinson v.
Workers’ Comp. App. Bd. (1987) 194 Cal. App. 3d 784, 52 Cal. Comp. Cases 419].
[2] Grounds for Rebuttal
Page 2 of 4
§ 7.08 Rebutting a Strict Impairment Rating Based on the AMA Guides
One theme that attorneys, judges and claims examiners must keep in mind about the AMA Guides is that the
authors admit in Chapter 1 that the Guides do not account for impairment of work functions. This is an
extremely important concept to understand. The Guides are only supposed to take into account the effects of
an impairment on ADL functioning. What is the difference between ADL functioning and work functioning? At
first glance, they look like the same or similar activities; e.g., Table 1-2 includes as some listed ADL functions:
lifting, non-specialized hand activities, writing, typing, sitting, standing, walking, climbing stairs and grasping, all
of which involve potential work functioning.
However, work functions that involve these activities require more intensity, stamina, exertion and productivity
standards than simple ADL functions, which are written in terms of everyday living activities not including work.
So an impairment may slightly affect ADL functioning, but the same impairment can have a devastating and
incapacitating effect on the same work activity when you perform that activity as a required work function. For
example, an injured construction worker, who has severe post-traumatic arthritis of a knee joint from an
industrial injury, may become totally incapacitated from jobs that require prolonged standing, walking and heavy
lifting even though his or her ADL functioning is not significantly affected. Similarly, a computer operator who
has had bilateral carpal tunnel surgeries may not have the stamina or ability to perform keyboarding activities
for six hours a day, five days a week, but whose ADL functioning is only mildly affected.
This is why a strict WPI rating can be easily rebutted in almost every case. A strict interpretation of all of the
chapters, tables and methods of the AMA Guides takes only into account impairment of ADL functioning. In
order to obtain a more accurate rating, a physician must take into account the effects of an industrial injury on
the injured worker’s ADL and work functioning and then find the most accurate WPI rating that applies in the
case using any chapter, table or method from the AMA Guides. Does this include methods that are not
mentioned in the AMA Guides but, nonetheless, use the actual tables and figures in the AMA Guides? You will
see some examples of this in the following section. It appears that the WCAB is willing to accept creative
methods of rating cases while using the chapters and tables in the AMA Guides as long as the ultimate WPI
rating is the most accurate impairment rating and constitutes substantial evidence. Remember, this analysis
occurs only after a party has disputed an initial WPI rating if that initial rating is based on a strict interpretation
of the chapters, tables and methods in the Guides. Case law will develop on what the WCAB meant by
allowable “methods” to be used by physicians in obtaining the most accurate impairment rating or in rebutting a
“prima facie” correct impairment rating that is based on a strict usage of the chapters, tables and methods in the
AMA Guides.
In all of the examples set forth in §§ 7.09–7.20, below, defendants would have to demonstrate to a judge that
the strict ratings under the AMA Guides are the most accurate, are based on reasonable medical probability
and are prima facie evidence of the Applicant’s permanent disability with respect to the rating under the AMA
Guides. Defendant would contend that any other rating that a physician concludes does not rebut the prima
facie permanent disability rating based on a “strict” interpretation of the Guides because the method, table or
chapter does not apply to a part of body injured or is based on speculation, surmise or guess. Exactly what
“methods” the WCAB will allow physicians to use to rebut a strict WPI rating from the AMA Guides will be
interesting to see developed in case law.
Attorneys for applicants are warned about using Almaraz-Guzman II and Guzman III to inflate ratings to
unrealistic and unreasonable levels. Do not take a case that is really worth a 10% WPI and try to turn it into a
75% WPI. This will only antagonize the workers’ compensation community and may cause the downfall of our
law practices, which permit us to develop the record in responsible ways to advocate for our clients.
Requirements for Rebutting a Scheduled DFEC Rating Using a LeBoeuf Rebuttal Method Under Ogilvie
III:
WARNING:
Practitioners should take note of the Dahl case, in which the court of appeal held that both Ogilvie and
LeBouef required consideration of the effect of the injury on the employee’s injury to be rehabilitated as
the threshold issue, not simply whether there was a different calculation as to the employee’s
diminished earning capacity [seeContra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl) (2015)
240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119]. For further discussion, see § 7.06[4][d], above. ■
Page 3 of 4
§ 7.08 Rebutting a Strict Impairment Rating Based on the AMA Guides
So here is a summary of what these WCAB panels indicate they will require in order for an adjusted DFEC to
rebut a scheduled one:
1. The DCA decision implies that there has to be an analysis of earnings loss before and after an applicant
is declared permanent and stationary even though the prior en banc decisions in Ogilvie discuss three
years post date of injury based on the RAND studies that did not use permanent and stationary dates as a
basis for their research on post injury earning capacity.
2. Post injury earnings may not reflect actual post injury earning capacity. WCJs must provide a finding of
what the injured worker’s post injury earning capacity is and the basis for that finding. The evidence relied
on should be based on empirical evidence and not just on the applicant’s testimony alone in most cases.
The WCAB panels are telling us to use earning capacity evidence criteria under the case of Argonaut v.
IAC (Montana) [27 Cal. Comp. Cases 130 (1962)]. The “Montana” criteria are as follows:
a. Earning capacity is what the injured worker would have earned had he or she not been injured.
b. Injured worker’s ability to work post injury.
c. Injured worker’s skill and education.
d. General labor market conditions, economic downturns
e. Employment opportunities for similarly situated applicants
f. No evidence of malingering; injured worker is motivated to work.
g. Retirement for reasons other than the industrial injury,
3. A WCJ must find what the injured worker’s earnings loss is based on and explain the period of the
earnings loss. The WCAB panels are implying post permanent and stationary period is important to see if
there are any earnings. The period after a permanent and stationary date is probably the best period to use
if there are no earnings and a legitimate reason for that exists.
4. A WCJ must determine if an adjusted DFEC factor is a true reflection of the injured worker’s loss of
earning capacity using Montana factors to include whether the Applicant is capable of being vocationally
rehabilitated.
5. The WCJ decides if an adjusted DFEC factor or scheduled one better reflects the injured worker’s
diminished earning capacity. The WCJ must state how and why one is better than the other. In fact, the
WCJ must explain each of the elements necessary to a successful rebuttal: the injured worker’s pre-injury
earning capacity; the post-injury earning capacity; what period is used to determine post injury earning
capacity; the same or similarly situated employee earnings; whether the control group would have included
the injured worker if he or she had not been injured on the job; the injured worker’s motivation to work; and
how and why an adjusted DFEC factor is more accurate than a scheduled one from the 2005 PDRS.
6. TTD, SDI, Social Security Disability benefits and wage loss payments are not considered as part of an
injured worker’s post injury earnings because they do not reflect earning capacity.
7. The WCJ should take into account the severity of the industrial injury to determine loss of earning
capacity.
8. If both an adjusted and scheduled DFEC are substantial evidence, the WCJ may choose which one
applies, which is the most accurate and explain how and why.
The Question of Fault. Does the DCA decision in Ogilvie III imply that you need expert witness testimony in
order to sustain an “Ogilvie III rebuttal?” Do these decisions indicate that workers’ compensation cases are
requiring the parties to enter “fault” into a no-fault benefit delivery system? Arguably, there is fault involved if the
employer does not accept an injured worker back to regular, modified or alternative work and now there is fault
of the injured worker in not mitigating damages if he or she does not return to the employer where an industrial
injury occurred.
Page 4 of 4
§ 7.08 Rebutting a Strict Impairment Rating Based on the AMA Guides
PRACTICE POINT:
If an applicant’s motivation to work is suspect, if there is a paucity of objective medical findings as a
result of an industrial injury, if the applicant is malingering or not motivated to work, and if applicant’s
attorney does not do his or her homework on presenting rebuttal evidence, then those are not the right
cases to try and rebut a scheduled DFEC factor.
The DCA decision in Ogilvie III did not provide any clear guidance on what evidence is sufficient to
rebut a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor. Only in subsequent WCAB panel decisions will we get a
flavor of what evidence and findings the WCAB expects a judge to explain and analyze to determine
whether a scheduled DFEC adjustment factor can be rebutted.
One thing is clear for attorneys who represent injured workers and who want to obtain an adjusted
DFEC factor that rebuts a scheduled one: Make sure your client is credible and his or her claim of post
injury loss of earning capacity includes a sufficient post-permanent and stationary period. If necessary,
obtain a Stipulated Award or Findings and Award and then file a Petition to Reopen the case after a
few years and before the five-year statute of limitations runs if the injured worker still has a significant
loss of earning capacity.
In addition, make sure you provide the judge with evidence of the injured worker’s pre-injury earning
capacity to later justify his or her inclusion in the “same or similarly situated employee” category for
post injury earnings. Make sure current economic forces have not significantly changed the chances
that the injured worker could perform work after the date of injury, e.g., a job offer was made but the
injured worker had to decline due to inability to perform the job.
Make sure that the loss of earnings has a reason that is based on objective medical findings and not
on the applicant’s lack of motivation to work. It does not take a genius to tell if an injured worker is
malingering or lacks motivation to work. Finally, make sure the WCJ makes specific findings in his or
her decision. You should always provide proposed rating instructions to include these elements for
which the WCJ can refer. So pick your battles carefully and do not try and apply an “Ogilvie III rebuttal”
in every case. Be careful what you wish for. ■
WARNING:
Practitioners should take note of the Dahl case, in which the court of appeal held that both Ogilvie and
LeBouef required consideration of the effect of the injury on the employee’s injury to be rehabilitated as
the threshold issue, not simply whether there was a different calculation as to the employee’s
diminished earning capacity [see Contra Costa County v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Dahl) (2015)
240 Cal. App. 4th 746, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 1119]. For further discussion, see § 7.06[4][d], above. ■
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.09
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.09 Example #1: Lower Extremity Cases and Table 17-2, The Cross-Usage
Chart
Alternative Method: Do not use cross-usage chart of Table 17-2
This example is given as a general method to rebut a strict impairment rating for lower extremity injury cases. Table
17-2 on page 526 has two purposes. The first purpose is to remind you of the 13 ways lower extremity impairments
can be rated using a strict interpretation of the AMA Guides. The second way Table 17-2 is used is as a “cross-
usage” chart wherein we are told that you cannot combine some types of lower extremity ratings with others. For
example, you cannot combine muscle strength loss (Table 17-8) with Diagnosis Based Estimates (Table 17-33), nor
can you combine gait derangement (Table 17-5) with any other of the 12 ways of evaluating lower extremity
impairments.
Curiously, the actual instructions on pages 526 and 527 do not fully explain why you cannot combine or add some
of these impairment ratings. There is no rationale stated by the authors exactly why you cannot combine many
impairments that seem to empirically go hand in hand, such as muscle weakness and arthritis or muscle weakness
and DBE ratings. Also just as curious, the authors state on page 527: “If more than one method can be used, the
method that provides the higher rating should be adopted.”
Physicians have stated that perhaps the cross-usage chart of Table 17-2 should not be used at all in workers’
compensation cases because this chart reduces ratings and in addition, the chart was designed to evaluate loss of
ADL functioning and not loss of work functioning. In addition, physicians have taken the position that you do not
combine the various impairment ratings using the Combined Values Chart that may apply in a given case under
Chapter 17; rather; you add them instead. The rationale goes on to state that adding the applicable impairments
that apply in a case under the checklist of the 13 ways of rating lower extremity injuries would more accurately
account for losses in both ADL and work functioning.
Therefore, to rebut a strict rating for any lower extremity case, counsel for the applicant would contend in a
deposition of a physician that you don’t use the cross-usage chart or the Combined Values Chart and that you
instead add the various individual ratings of each applicable ratable lower extremity rating, which would more
accurately describe the ultimate WPI an injured worker has. In fact, the DEU raters will combine the ratings for each
component of a lower extremity impairment rating after converting WPI ratings for each to permanent disability in
accordance with the instructions of the 2005 PDRS. So the argument goes, you don’t have the physician combine
anything at all.
So, take the case where an injured worker has a partial medial meniscectomy, but also has grade 4/5 flexion and
extension muscle strength (5% WPI for each), 1 mm of interval cartilage, 1% WPI for the partial meniscectomy
(Table 17-33); 10% WPI for the grade 4 flexion and extension muscle strength loss for the knee (Table 17-8), and
10% WPI for the arthritis (Table 17-31). If a strict impairment rating applies, the cross-usage chart of Table 17-2
would only allow the 10% WPI for muscle strength because ratings under the DBE and arthritis tables cannot be
combined with it. If you combined the impairments (10% combined with 10% = 19% combined with 1%), you would
get a 21% WPI.
The injured worker would contend, through medical evidence, that adding the WPI ratings results in the most
accurate rating in a particular case provided that the physician completely, adequately and correctly justifies his or
Page 2 of 2
§ 7.09 Example #1: Lower Extremity Cases and Table 17-2, The Cross-Usage Chart
her conclusions and explains the rationale for his or her conclusion that the strict rating is not the most accurate in
this case and how and why the modified WPI impairment rating is the most accurate. The defendant would contend
that the final WPI rating should be 10% for the arthritis and that the strict rating follows the correct “method” of the
AMA Guides (properly using the cross-usage chart) and the method propounded by the injured worker (adding the
ratings and not using the cross-usage chart) does not apply since it is contrary to the instructions on pages 526–
527.
In addition, why not rebut the entire use of the Combined Values Chart (“CVC”) in a similar way. Do you notice in
many cases that the physician uses the CVC in calculating the WPI rating for a part of body injured such as using
the ROM method for a lumbar spinal condition? For that WPI rating, the physician is required to combine, using the
CVC, the WPI ratings for the loss of motion (flexion, extension, and lateral flexion), combined with the Spinal
Disorders rating from Table 15-7, and then combined with the neurologic sensory and motor deficit WPI ratings. If
the injured worker has other parts of body injured besides the lumbar spine, you then combine the permanent
disability for the lumbar spine with everything else that is ratable for the same injury. So, in essence, you are using
the CVC multiple times, which can drastically reduce the overall permanent disability rating for a single injury.
For example, in a case handled by the author, the case was settled for a 91% permanent disability where the two
primary WPI ratings combined to 86% permanent disability, but there were additional seven separate ratings
between 5 and 20% each with the overall proper use of the CVC resulting in the 91% permanent disability rating.
Why didn't the applicant's attorney go for 100% permanent and total disability under LeBoeuf? The applicant lost
only a year from his work as a highway construction superintendent after his head-on vehicle collision and had been
working his usual and customary job for five years when his case settled. But that is not the point. In many cases
the strict use of the CVC results in ridiculously low permanent disability ratings. Since the CVC is predicated solely
on the effect of impairment on ADL functioning, shouldn't there be a restriction in the use of the CVC for calculation
of work disabilities?
If you are an applicant’s attorney, this is a viable argument as another way to rebut a permanent disability rating. If
you are a defense attorney, your argument is that the 2005 PDRS requires use of the CVC after WPI has been
adjusted for occupation and age, and the use of the CVC in calculating a specific WPI is the duty of the physician in
compliance with the instructions in the AMA Guides, which is a separate process from combining permanent
disability ratings later in determining an overall permanent disability for a given injury that involves multiple parts of
body.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.10
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.10 Example #2: Ferras v. United Airlines—Adductor Tendon Tear
Alternative Method: Use hernia chapter instead of lower extremity chapter
The injured employee was an aircraft mechanic who sustained injury involving a torn adductor muscle in the leg. A
WCAB panel upheld a WCJ’s determination that Table 6-9, the hernia table in Chapter 6 The Digestive System,
more accurately described the impairment than any other table or chart in Chapter 17, the lower extremity chapter.
A strict impairment rating would have been 0% WPI because a torn adductor muscle condition is not mentioned
anywhere in the AMA Guides, but the physician used his clinical judgment in determining a more accurate rating
from the Digestive System Chapter. The injured aircraft mechanic was permanently precluded from lifting over 30
pounds. The trial judge agreed with the physician, who opined that the injured employee has a Class 2 (10%–19%
WPI) hernia impairment under Table 6-9 of 19% WPI which states: “Frequent discomfort, precluding heavy lifting
but not hampering some activities of daily living.” The final permanent disability rating was 24%.
This panel decision that adopted and incorporated the WCJ’s Report and Recommendation on Defendant’s Petition
for Reconsideration was issued in May 2009 while the WCAB en banc decision in Almaraz-Guzman II was being
deliberated by all of the commissioners [see Ferras v. United Airlines, BPD, 37 CWCR 99].
This decision from a WCAB panel is one of the earliest cases where a trial judge relied on the creative use of
another chapter, tables, or methods in the AMA Guides when the underlying objective medical condition was not
listed under the lower extremity chapter even though the injury involved a seriously injured tendon in the leg
resulting in a permanent preclusion from lifting over 30 pounds.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.11
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.11 Example #3: Four Objective Findings, But Only One Ratable
Impairment—Knee Injury
Alternative Method A: Use Table 17-3 as a regional impairment rating for lower extremity injuries.
Alternative Method B: Use Station and Gait Impairment Table 13-15 for lower extremity Injuries.
This injured worker is a long term cashier and stock worker at a chain pharmacy, when in 2008 she fell down a flight
of stairs injuring her left knee. The objective findings consist of MRI evidence of a “partially or completely torn ACL,”
mild to moderate positive anterior drawer sign, 7 degrees of flexion contracture, ¾ cm thigh atrophy and a positive
patellar grind test. The injured worker did not have knee surgery out of fear of an adverse result and continues to be
unemployed after the injury.
During the summer of 2009, an AME opined that under the AMA Guides, the injured worker has a 0% WPI, but she
has permanent work restrictions consisting of “preclusion from kneeling, squatting, going up and down stairs; no
walking on uneven terrain, no pivoting and no other activities involving comparable effort as with regards to the left
knee; she has lost 25 % of her pre-injury capacity for these activities.”
Needless to say, the injured worker’s attorney took the AME’s deposition to establish first that at least one of the
objective medical findings should have been properly rated under the AMA Guides and second, that there were
some alternative WPI rating methods that may be more accurate in light of the permanent effects the industrial
injury has on the injured worker’s weight bearing functioning (both ADL and work functions). In addition, there
should be an alternative WPI rating that takes into account all four objective medical findings and not just one of
them.
This example raises a point. When you first read an MMI medical report, make sure that the physician has given an
accurate, strict WPI rating in the first place. In this case, the AME failed to rate the mild to moderate positive
anterior drawer sign, which is evidence of cruciate ligament laxity and is ratable along with the diagnostic imaging
confirming an ACL tear. Under Table 17-33, mild cruciate ligament laxity rates 3% WPI and a moderate cruciate
ligament laxity rates 7% WPI. The ¾ cm thigh atrophy is not ratable under Table 17-6 even though the AME
testified in his deposition that the girth measurements of both thighs should be equal and the ¾ cm atrophy in the
left leg is an objective medical finding of the injured employee’s left knee injuries.
After looking at Tables 17-33 and 17-6, the AME corrected his conclusion that the case rated 0% WPI and instead
testified that the strict AMA Guides rating is 4% WPI (between mild and moderate cruciate laxity) and 0% WPI for
the atrophy. Since Table 17-2 cross-usage chart does not allow combining atrophy and DBE ratings, you take the
highest rating, which is the DBE rating of 4% WPI, which would be the final strict WPI rating.
The trouble with this case in general is that the injured worker has four permanent objective medical findings from
her left knee injury of which only one is marginally ratable. Remember what permanent work restrictions the AME
imposed on her and imagine the effect of those restrictions on her future earning capacity. The AME used two
alternative rating methods and used the AMA Guides 5th Edition to come up with them.
The first alternative rating method involved the physician concluding that the Applicant has permanently lost 25% of
her weight bearing functioning with respect to her left leg on account of her left knee industrial injuries and objective
Page 2 of 2
§ 7.11 Example #3: Four Objective Findings, But Only One Ratable Impairment—Knee Injury
findings (the MRI evidence of the ACL tear, the 7 degrees flexion contracture, ligament laxity, positive grind test and
the ¾ cm atrophy). Table 17-3 is a conversion chart that converts lower extremity impairment ratings to whole
person impairment ratings. The AME used this chart and opined that since the injured worker lost 25% of her weight
bearing functioning of her left leg because of her knee injury, she has a 10% WPI (based on 25% of the maximum
value of a leg which is 40% WPI—i.e., an amputated leg is a 40% WPI).
The second alternative impairment rating is under Table 13-15. The AME was asked about Table 13-15 on page
336 the Station and Gait Disorders. This table is intended for central nervous system or peripheral nervous system
impairments or CRPS of a lower extremity (see page 343, which refers to Table 13-15 for lower extremity
impairments due to chronic pain). The AME testified that since the injured worker’s leg condition was due to a knee
injury and there was no central or peripheral nerve injury or CRPS, he could not use this Table.
However, after confirming that three out of four objective medical conditions were not directly rated in the AMA
Guides Chapter 17, the physician felt he was allowed to go to other chapters, tables and methods in the AMA
Guides and utilize the instructions on page 1-4 of the 2005 PDRS that allows for alternative WPI ratings, when
appropriate. The AME was not familiar with the quoted language of page 1-4 of the 2005 PDRS until it was shown
to him during his deposition. The AME then read a Class 2 impairment rating under Table 13-15 Station and Gait
Disorders: “Rises to standing position, walks some distance with difficulty and without assistance, but is limited to
level surfaces.
The AME then concluded that based on her 25% loss of weight bearing functioning, under a Class 2 impairment
range of 10%–19% WPI, the injured worker has a 15% WPI on account of the effects of her knee injury on her
weight bearing functioning of her left leg. He opined that the highest rating should apply in this case and adopted
the 15% WPI in this case based on his clinical judgment, experience, skill and the evaluation of the injured worker
and the long term effects of her injury on her ADL and work functioning. He opined that his conclusions are based
on reasonable medical probability and the 15% WPI is the most accurate rating in this case because of the four
objective medical findings and the effect of those factors on her loss of weight bearing functioning.
So the case started with a 0% WPI in the original AME report and ended with a 15% WPI final rating after the AME
deposition. The defense counsel had no significant questions during the deposition and defendant has relied on the
strict rating that the AME should have assigned in the first place-only for the ligament laxity and ignoring the
atrophy, positive grind knee compression test and the 7 degree flexion contracture.
We have seen a number of AME physicians use Table 17-3 in the same manner as this AME, which can be a viable
way to establish what essentially is a regional impairment of the entire leg as a result of an injury to one or more
parts of a leg. The AMA Guides 5th Edition does not have a regional impairment rating system for the entire leg,
unlike the spinal chapter (Chapter 15 The Spine) which does (see AMA Guides, page 427 for spinal regional
impairments and the Example #9 in § 7.17, discussed below).
The physician’s conclusions in using this method must be supported by objective medical findings that are not
independently rated in the AMA Guides. In our example, only the ligament laxity was directly ratable. But the cross-
usage chart would have eliminated any atrophy rating. A WCJ would have to weigh the range of evidence in this
case (technically 0% WPI from the report to 15% WPI under Table 13-15 post AME deposition).
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.12
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.12 Example #4: Rotator Cuff Tears, Shoulder Impingement Cases,
Elbows, Any Upper Extremity Joint Involvement
Alternative Method: Use Table 16-18 to indicate percentage loss of use of the joint
In the upper extremity Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides, under “Other Disorders” you will find Table 16-18 on page
499. Table 16-18 was originally intended to be used in conjunction with disorders that are included in Tables 16-19
through 16-30, and the rating from those specific medical conditions are to be multiplied times the maximum value
of the specific joint listed in Table 16-18. However, some physicians are using Table 16-18 to provide an
independent rating for upper extremity conditions that we commonly see in our cases, but which are not listed
specifically in the AMA Guides, such as rotator cuff tears and shoulder impingement injuries.
First, you need to be aware of some anatomy—the rotator cuff supports the glenohumeral joint. The main complaint
patients have with rotator cuff tears repaired surgically or not is weakness of the shoulder joint and loss of range of
motion for external rotation and sometimes abduction. Table 16-18 says that the glenohumeral joint has a maximum
value of 36% WPI and the acromioclavicular joint (the AC joint) has a maximum value of 15% WPI. All you have to
do is ask a treating or evaluating physician: “Doctor, what percentage loss of function does the injured worker have
with respect to the glenohumeral joint (or AC joint, as applicable)?” For example a 50% loss of function of the
glenohumeral joint from a rotator cuff tear with or without surgical repair is 50% of the maximum value of the joint,
which is 36% WPI, which equals an 18% WPI final rating. The question about “loss of function” should include loss
of work function as well as ADL function.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.13
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.13 Example #5: Fractured Elbow With Avascular Necrosis and
Contracture
Alternative Method: Add loss of motion, pain and Table 16-18 loss of proximal radioulnar joint.
A 43-year-old outside drug sales associate tripped over her own pantsuit and fell, fracturing her right elbow, while at
a gas station and en route to visit clients in Ventura County. The trip and fall resulted in emergency surgery to her
proximal radio-ulnar joint. After the first surgery, the injured worker developed avascular necrosis and a contracture
of the elbow joint, resulting in a second surgery with implantation of hardware. The AME opined that the loss of
range of motion of the elbow rates 6% WPI, but that rating alone is not sufficient to reflect the true impairment of
this injured worker.
The AME utilized the pie charts as scheduled to conclude a 6% WPI rating for loss of range of motion of the elbow
applies, and then he utilized Table 16-18 for an additional rating of 12% WPI due to the complete loss of function of
proximal radial-ulnar joint. In addition, at trial the WCJ added a 3% WPI pain add-on pursuant to Chapter 18 of the
AMA Guides and page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS that implies that a judge can add up to 3% WPI for pain related
effects on the injured worker’s ADL functioning.
The range of evidence in this case was a 6% WPI strict rating for loss of motion only to 21% WPI: 6% WPI due to
the loss of motion, 12% WPI for the loss of function of the proximal radioulnar joint and 3% WPI for pain. However,
the AME in his report and confirmed in his deposition testimony, concluded that the 6% WPI range of motion rating
alone was not sufficient to describe this patient’s impairment to her right dominant elbow. He also testified that
avascular necrosis and an elbow contracture are not listed as medical conditions anywhere in the AMA Guides, and
he used his clinical judgment, experience, education and skill in finding an alternative method to evaluate this case
and came to his conclusions.
This case went to trial and the WCJ vacated formal rating instructions twice, asking the parties to submit proposed
formal rating instructions. The defendant requested formal rating instructions based solely on the loss of motion of
the elbow joint. The applicant requested formal rating instructions for the loss of motion, loss of the proximal
radioulnar joint and the pain add-on.
The WCJ called a DEU rater as a witness, who testified that the doctor used unconventional methods to evaluate
this case, but she was required to rate a case based on the formal rating instructions given to her by the WCJ. She
testified that when a medical condition is not listed in the AMA Guides, the physician may use other similar ratings
for similar conditions with impairment of function that are listed in the Guides. The rater was not aware of the
instructions on page 1-4 of the 2005 PDRS that mandates a physician to use clinical judgment to assign an
impairment rating when a medical condition is not listed in the AMA Guides but involves objective medical findings
that cause permanent impairment of function.
The WCJ issued a Findings and Award of 24% permanent disability based on the loss of motion of the elbow joint,
the loss of function of the proximal radioulnar joint using Table 16-18, and the 3% pain add-on. Defendant filed a
Petition for Reconsideration, which was denied.
This case is also worth mentioning here because the WCAB upheld the trial judge’s award during the same time the
WCAB itself was deliberating the same issues in Almaraz-Guzman I on whether and how a party can rebut a strict
Page 2 of 2
§ 7.13 Example #5: Fractured Elbow With Avascular Necrosis and Contracture
rating under the AMA Guides. In this case, the AME used the same chapter but other tables and methods within
Chapter 16 the upper extremity chapter of the AMA Guides to come to his conclusion that the ultimate rating was
the most accurate impairment rating in this case. Interestingly enough, during the litigation of this case, there was
no discussion by anyone, including the AME, that the strict rating was inequitable or disproportionate or would result
in an unfair permanent disability award. The AME simply opined that the range of motion rating alone was not an
accurate rating of this case.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.14
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.14 Example #6: Injured Worker Has Lost Significant Function in One or
Both Upper Extremities Due to Multiple Impairments
Alternative Method A: Use Table 16-3 to determine percentage loss of function of the entire upper extremity.
Alternative Method B: Use Table 16-2 for multiple hand impairments or a single serious hand impairment.
Hypothetically, an injured worker could suffer from carpal tunnel syndrome, an ulnar nerve entrapment syndrome,
such as epicondylitis at the elbow, and a rotator cuff injury, all on the same upper extremity. Each of these
conditions probably has objective medical evidence of impairment. Since the maximum value of an upper extremity
is 60% WPI, a physician could be asked, “Doctor, what percentage loss of upper extremity function (for ADL and
work functions) does the injured worker have on account of the permanent objective medical findings for his or her
wrist, elbow and shoulder conditions with regards to his or her entire upper extremity?” If the answer is “I believe the
injured worker has lost 50% of his or her right upper extremity function”, that would equal a 30% WPI rating based
on Table 16-3. So if a person loses half of his or her ability to function with an upper extremity, he or she would
have 50% of a 60% WPI rating since an upper extremity’s maximum value is 60% WPI.
It may not be unreasonable to use this method in cases in which the injured worker has carpal tunnel syndrome,
epicondylitis, and De Quervain’s tenosynovitis, where the ultimate impairment rating is determined by the
physician’s conclusion of what percentage loss of function does the injured worker have of the entire upper
extremity. This alternative method may apply in any upper extremity case in which there are one or more serious
permanent objective findings within the same upper extremity.
We have seen cases where an injured worker has a post traumatic carpal tunnel syndrome, De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis and a fractured scaphoid bone, resulting in significant permanent residual loss of function of the hand.
Table 16-2 covers a conversion of hand impairment ratings to upper extremity impairment ratings. So
hypothetically, a physician can opine that the injured worker has lost 50% of his hand functioning on a permanent
basis due to the residuals from a specific injury that causes multiple impairment of the hand. Table 16-2 says that
hand function is 90% of the entire upper extremity function. Since the upper extremity is worth 60% WPI and the
hand is 90% of the upper extremity, a total loss of function of a hand is 90% of 60%, which would be a 54% WPI
rating. A 50% loss of function of a hand would rate 27% WPI. This method is mathematically elegant in cases that
involve multiple impairments to the hand in which individual ratings of each component of the hand injury would not
be an accurate impairment rating of the entire hand function for ADL and work activities.
Like the lower extremity chapter in the AMA Guides, the upper extremity chapter also does not have a regional
impairment table for multiple impairments in the same upper extremity. In these cases, if a physician opines that the
injured worker has lost such and such percent of use of his or her upper extremity, counsel is reminded to make
sure that the physician’s conclusion is supported by sufficient facts of objective medical findings and that the
physician states why a strict rating is not the most accurate method of determining the injured worker’s impairment.
The physician must incorporate any objective medical findings with upper extremity ADL and work functioning
deficits that are caused by the industrial injury, and consistent with Almaraz-Guzman II, the physician must state
with reasonable medical probability how and why this method of rating the WPI is the most accurate.
Defense counsel would contend in cases where a physician tries to rebut a strict rating of upper extremity
impairments using a regional impairment analysis that the strict rating is the most accurate since the AMA Guides
Page 2 of 2
§ 7.14 Example #6: Injured Worker Has Lost Significant Function in One or Both Upper Extremities Due to
Multiple Impairments
does not have regional impairment ratings for upper extremity medical conditions—each condition must be rated
separately in order for there to be an accurate assessment. Counsel for an applicant would argue that a regional
impairment rating such as what is used in these examples is more accurate because this method takes into direct
account loss of ADL and work functioning while strict ratings under all of the orthopedic chapters (AMA Guides
Chapters 15, 16, and 17) do not have any framework for assessing loss of functioning. The authors in those
chapters just blindly state that impairment of ADL functions are already embedded within the ratings, but they do
not describe anywhere in the AMA Guides 5th Edition the framework for how ADL functional deficits are so
embedded.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.15
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.15 Example #7: Carpal Tunnel Syndrome as the Only Diagnosis
Alternative Method A: Use Table 13-22 Impairment of one upper extremity due to chronic pain.
Alternative Method B: Is grip loss back?
Alternative Method C: If total loss of a hand is 54% WPI, use Table 16-2 to indicate percentage loss of ADL and
work functioning of the hand/wrist. Or use Table 16-3 to estimate regional upper extremity impairment due to
percentage loss of upper extremity use.
We have seen a large number of carpal tunnel syndrome cases that result in a variety of WPI ratings. Under the
1997 and prior PDRS editions, grip loss was considered an “objective finding” and was ratable along with
prophylactic partial or complete preclusions from gross and fine manipulation. Under the AMA Guides, a WPI rating
for carpal tunnel syndrome is strictly interpreted by the authors on page 495 of the Guides and depends wholly on
electro-diagnostic testing after an “optimal recovery period” from carpal tunnel release surgery. Very few, if any,
California physicians follow these extremely strict instructions.
Most physicians in California workers’ compensation cases use the median nerve sensory and motor function
impairment grading system that are in Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15. The problem with the rubric for rating carpal
tunnel syndrome using Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15 is that the resulting rating applies only to the condition at the
time of the evaluation and does not contemplate any prophylactic restrictions or the high likelihood that repetitive
work activities can and will aggravate the wrist and forearm even with successful surgery. We have seen many
cases where the injured worker is released to return to the very same activities that precipitated the original carpal
tunnel condition in the first place, only to have the condition reoccur.
However, with that being said, the authors of the AMA Guides also discourage use of grip strength loss or muscle
weakness as a way to rate carpal tunnel syndrome, stating that there are better ways to rate the condition based on
sensory and motor function deficits as measured by electro-diagnostic testing.
As stated in Ch. 3, § 3.16[5] of this guidebook, most California physicians do not follow the strict instructions in the
AMA Guides for rating carpal tunnel syndrome cases as stated on page 495 of the Guides. Instead, they use
Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15, as the instructions for those Tables indicate for sensory and motor deficits. These
tables and instructions for those tables say absolutely nothing about taking into consideration loss of function as
part of the ratings. Loss of function is supposed to be included in the grade of the sensory and motor function
impairment ratings. However, there is no correlation between these ratings and loss of work or ADL functional
capacities.
Despite the instructions for using sensory and motor function ratings for the median nerve, the Guides are replete
with ratings for muscle strength loss for upper and lower extremities and, specifically, grip strength loss for the
hand/wrist. See, e.g., Tables 16-31 through 16-34 for grip and pinch strength ratings. Under Almaraz-Guzman II, a
physician may justify use of grip strength loss as a more accurate rating than one based on Tables 16-10, 16-11,
and 16-15, because grip strength is a functional impairment, while the median nerve sensory and motor function
deficits are anatomical impairments. As stated earlier, the orthopedic chapters of the AMA Guides do not provide
any kind of guidance for evaluating loss of ADL or work function. Remember, Chapter 1 of the Guides tell us not to
use the Guides for determining permanent impairment in work functioning.
Page 2 of 2
§ 7.15 Example #7: Carpal Tunnel Syndrome as the Only Diagnosis
A physician can utilize grip loss as a more accurate rating in carpal tunnel cases than using median sensory and
motor deficit measurements despite warnings not to use grip loss when other “more reliable” methods of
measurement are applicable. Why? Because the instructions that discourage use of muscle strength loss in grip
loss cases do not take into account work function impairment. Work duties that involve hand intensive activities
involve factors, such as productivity requirements over a 40-hour-per-week basis, while non-work ADL functions
that involve hand activities are less intense over time. It is understandable that the authors of the upper extremity
chapter in the AMA Guides would discount muscle strength loss as a method of evaluating impairment when other
anatomical measurements contemplate loss of ADL functioning, which requires much greater impairment than loss
of work functioning.
Simply stated, grip strength loss may be alive and well in the AMA Guides post-Almaraz-Guzman II if a rating using
grip strength loss is a more accurate rating than a strict one that is calculated using Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-
15. Some may even argue that you can use both a grip loss impairment rating and combine or add it to the median
sensory and motor impairment ratings. This could be medically justified again by the medical argument that the
strict rating only accounts for impairment in ADL functioning while the ratings for grip loss with the sensory/motor
impairments take into account work function impairments and, therefore, constitute a more accurate impairment
rating than a strict one solely based on the sensory/motor deficit method.
In some carpal tunnel syndrome cases, a fair or poor result from surgery occurs due to incomplete surgery, scar
tissue formation or recurrent median nerve irritability. In these cases, even grip loss may not be the most accurate
method of rating carpal tunnel syndrome. Table 13-22 is a good example of an alternative method of rating some
carpal tunnel syndrome cases. A Class 1 impairment exists for a dominant hand of 1%–9% WPI and 1%–4% WPI
for non-dominant hand if the “individual can use the involved extremity for self care, daily activities and holding, but
is limited in digital dexterity.” A Class 2 impairment exists for a dominant hand of 10%–24% WPI and 5%–14% WPI
for non-dominant hand if the “individual can use the involved extremity for self care and can grasp and hold objects
with difficulty but has no digital dexterity.”
Another alternative method of rating carpal tunnel syndrome is to ask the physician to use Table 16-2 and give an
opinion of what percentage loss of hand function there is as a result of carpal tunnel syndrome, when the physician
also takes into account any evidence that further overuse of the hand and wrist would cause recurrence of signs,
symptoms and complaints. If the physician, for example, opines that the injured worker has lost 25% of his or her
pre-injury capacity for gross manipulation, fine manipulation in ADL and work functioning, that rating would be a
14% WPI (based on total loss of hand functioning is 54% WPI and 25% of that is 14% WPI).
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.16
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.16 Example #8: Muscle Strength Loss, Loss of Motion and Resection
Arthroplasty for Shoulder
Alternative method: Add the different components of the ratings and do not strictly follow instructions indicating you
cannot rate muscle strength loss in presence of pain, loss of motion or loss of a body part.
This example is actually a real example that went to trial and was resolved a couple of years prior to Almaraz-
Guzman I. You can read the example in Ch. 4, § 4.14 of this guidebook. This case involved a machinist who injured
his shoulder resulting in a partially torn rotator cuff, surgically repaired with debridement, decompression and a
distal clavicle resection arthroplasty. The treating physician concluded that the shoulder injury should be rated for
loss of motion, loss of strength and the resection arthroplasty even though the instructions in the Guides discourage
rating muscle strength loss in the presence of pain, loss of motion or a missing body part like a thumb. See page
505 of the AMA Guides, section 16.7b.
The strict rating in this case included a 6% WPI for the resection arthroplasty (Table 16-27) and 4% WPI for loss of
motion. In addition, the physician opined that the muscle strength loss that rated 7% WPI should be combined with
the other ratings. He testified in his deposition that the three factors of impairment were based on objective medical
findings, and he felt the injured worker was using maximum effort in performing the muscle strength testing. He
disregarded the prohibition from using muscle strength impairments in the presence of pain, loss of motion or loss
of a body part because the injured worker’s efforts were credible and he felt the three factors of impairment were
more accurate than just two of them.
In some ways, the WCAB decision in Almaraz-Guzman II is just a restatement of existing law and is a reminder by
the WCAB how these cases need to have the record developed with medical evidence to justify a more accurate
but higher rating than what results with a strict application of the AMA Guides.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.17
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.17 Example #9: Various Ways to Rebut Strict Spinal Impairment Ratings
In all spinal injury cases, everyone must always be aware of any objective medical findings of pathology within the
lumbar spinal sub-region including, but not limited to herniated discs, stenosis, bulging discs, spondylosis,
spondylosisthesis, fractures, annular tears, fusion surgery and many more. See Ch. 3, § 3.15 and Ch. 4, § 4.13 of
this guidebook for more details. Medical research indicates that when there are multiple pathologies occurring
within the lumbar spinal sub-region, 93% of the time the clinical physician cannot tell which pathology is causing the
patient’s symptoms. If this is true in clinical practice, how can anyone tell which pathology is causing permanent
impairment? For that matter, how can anyone tell which objective medical findings are directly or indirectly caused
by industrial exposures?
This is why all factors need to be assessed for an impairment rating if the condition is otherwise ratable based on
objective medical findings. This is also why impairment ratings must be based on objective medical findings in the
first place. So you can have multiple pathologies occurring in the low back where only one factor is causing
symptoms, but all pathologies should be ratable. This is because of the uncertainty of exactly which pathology is
causing symptoms and which are not but may in the future. The WCAB decision in Almaraz-Guzman II accounts for
these factors, and physicians should be permitted to use any chapter, tables and methods in the AMA Guides that
result in the most accurate impairment rating.
The following methods of rating spinal conditions can be considered by physicians that utilize the chapters, tables
and methods of the AMA Guides:
1. Add the impairment, don’t combine them. In any case where the ROM method applies, instead of combining
the spinal diagnosis (Table 15-7) with the ratings from the loss of motion measurements and then combining with
the sensory and motor nerve deficits, the physician adds the three ratings. So if a spinal diagnosis rating is 7% WPI
from section II(C) in Table 15-7 and the loss of motion rates 2% WPI for flexion, 3% for extension (Table 15-8) and
2% each WPI for right and left lateral flexion (Table 15-9) and the sensory/motor deficit 1% WPI for an L5 nerve root
radiculopathy, 5% WPI for loss of strength for the L5 nerve root (Tables 15-17 and 15-18), the final WPI is 22% WPI
by adding the ratings for each component. If you follow the strict instructions of combining the three components
(spinal disorder, ROM and sensory/motor nerve impairments), the rating would be 20% WPI.
2. Use Table 15-7 creatively. In spinal fusion cases that involve more than one level, you assign the same
impairment rating from Table 15-7 for each level that is operated on that constitutes the fused levels and you add
them. Then you rate the loss of motion as usual under the ROM method and then rate the neurological sensory and
motor deficits as usual and then you add the three components as described in item 1 above. In Table 15-7 a
category IV D. is described as “Single level spinal fusion with or without decompression with residual signs and
symptoms” rates a 10% WPI for the cervical spine and 12% WPI for the lumbar spine. The instructions in the same
table indicate that you add only 1% WPI per additional spinal fusion level. This strict instruction makes absolutely no
sense since multiple level fusions present more stress over time to the remaining spinal levels that have not been
fused. Remember, in most cases, any spinal fusion will affect work functioning and, empirically, the more levels that
are fused the more effect there will be on work and ADL functioning.
“Single level spinal fusion with or without decompression with residual signs and symptoms” rates a 10% WPI for
the cervical spine and 12% WPI for the lumbar spine. The instructions in the same table indicate that you add only
1% WPI per additional spinal fusion level. This strict instruction makes absolutely no sense since multiple level
Page 2 of 4
§ 7.17 Example #9: Various Ways to Rebut Strict Spinal Impairment Ratings
fusions present more stress over time to the remaining spinal levels that have not been fused. Remember, in most
cases, any spinal fusion will affect work functioning and, empirically, the more levels that are fused the more effect
there will be on work and ADL functioning.
In addition, patients who have had multilevel spinal fusions tend to have greater signs, symptoms and complaints
with higher permanent impairment of function with respect to ADL and work activities. So an injured worker who has
a two level lumbar fusion should have a 24% WPI (12% WPI for each level instead of 13% if the strict instructions
were followed) combined with or added to the ROM impairment combined with or added to the neurological
sensory-motor impairment ratings. The ultimate rating for such a patient would be much more accurate than one
derived from applying the strict ROM instructions. A three level lumbar fusion would rate 36% WPI (instead of a
strict 14% WPI) then combined or added to the ROM rating and combined or added to the neurological rating.
Adding or combining the three components would depend upon the physician’s opinion about how the surgical
outcome affects the injured worker’s ADL and work functioning, in the absence of any other complications from a
two or three level fusion, whether or not there is stabilization instrumentation and other medical and functional
considerations. Remember, a physician would have to justify this method and explain why this method constitutes a
more accurate impairment rating than using the strict application of the ROM method that starts with Table 15-7.
Creatively using Table 15-7 can apply in any spinal case, not just involving fusions. So in any spinal case where
there is multiple pathology within a sub-region of the spine, a physician could hypothetically combine or add
different ratable components that are described in Table 15-7 under the different spinal disorders.
3. Use DRE or ROM and add or combine corticospinal tract impairments from Table 15-6. In cases of failed
lumbar syndrome cases, the physician may determine a more accurate rating by adding or combining the
corticospinal tract impairment ratings from Table 15-6 with the appropriate ROM or DRE method. The instructions in
the Guides require the physician to combine any standard ROM or DRE rating with any applicable corticospinal
tract impairment. Again, the physician can make the case of adding ratings rather than combining the ratings,
providing a detailed explanation of why he or she is deviating from the strict instructions in the Guides to combine
the ratings.
4. Use regional impairment method explained on page 427 and Figure 15-19. If there is one level of the spine
that requires decompression or fusion surgery but other levels within the same sub-region of the spine also have
some pathology, a strict DRE or ROM rating may not be the most accurate. That is why the AMA Guides have a
regional impairment method that very few physicians understand, but which can result in much more accurate
ratings. The method is described on page 427 of the AMA Guides and counsel should always check this method in
any case where there is surgery at one level but at least one other level in the same spinal sub-region also has
some pathology. A physician may justify using the spinal regional method even with only one level of pathology if
the entire sub-region of the spine is significantly compromised.
Convert DRE or ROM to regional impairment and then convert regional impairment to final WPI rating. Essentially
you take the DRE or ROM rating and then calculate the regional spinal impairment using the instructions on pages
427 and then finally convert the regional impairment to WPI. On page 427, Figure 15-19 shows the maximum whole
person impairment value of each spinal sub-region:
Cervical Spine = 80%
Thoracic Spine = 40%
Lumbar Spine = 90%
Sacral Spine = 5%
So if a person’s entire lumbar spine was compromised, he or she would have a 90% WPI; if the person’s cervical
spine was entirely compromised, he or she would have a 80% WPI. The text instructs how to convert a DRE or
ROM rating into a regional impairment rating and then calculating a final WPI rating as follows:
Page 3 of 4
§ 7.17 Example #9: Various Ways to Rebut Strict Spinal Impairment Ratings
1. Establish either a DRE or ROM rating utilizing Chapter 15 as usual.
2. If the rating is based on the DRE method, take the DRE rating and divide by .35 for a cervical spine injury, .20 for
thoracic and .75 for the lumbar and sacral spines. Then multiply the regional rating times the maximum value of the
sub-region to get the final WPI rating.
3. If the rating is based on the ROM method, take the ROM rating and divide by .80 for the cervical spine, .40 for
the thoracic spine and .90 for the lumbosacral spine. The final rating is a regional spinal rating, expressed as a WPI
for the entire spinal sub-region. Remember, the ROM rating itself is based on the entire sub-region and is not based
on a single level within that sub-region.
4. Instead, use percentage loss of function of entire sub-region based on maximum WPI value of that sub-region.
Alternatively, a physician can use Figure 15-19 to establish a WPI based on the maximum WPI value of the spinal
sub-region and the percentage loss of function for ADL and work activities based on objective medical findings for
the injured sub-region.
The best example is one we see all the time in our cases. Suppose an injured worker is a 37-year-old deputy sheriff
who has a one level fusion in his cervical spine at C5-C6, but also has a 3-4mm disc bulge at C4-C5, which was not
operated on because the neurosurgeon felt that this level was not causing the symptoms. The physician knows that
the medical literature predicts a 3% per year adjacent segmental degeneration at the levels above and below the
fusion. In addition, the deputy sheriff also has an 8 mm disc herniation in his L4-L5 disc with an L5 nerve root
irritation and a 5 mm disc bulge at L3-L4.
Assume that the physician opines that the cervical spine rates a DRE Category III 15% WPI and the lumbar spine
rates a DRE Category III 10% WPI. For the cervical spine the regional impairment rating converted to final WPI is:
15/.35 = 42.86% = 43% × .80 = 34.29% = 34% final WPI rating. For the lumbar spine, the regional impairment
rating is 10/.75 = 13.33 = 13% × .90 = 11.99% = 12% final WPI.
Alternatively, a physician could issue an opinion that based on multiple pathologies within any of the spinal sub-
regions, the injured worker has lost such and such percentage of ADL and work functioning of the cervical, thoracic
and/or lumbar spine, resulting in a final WPI rating of X%. So if you have a case involving a lumbar spinal injury with
a two level fusion at L4-L5 and L5-S1 and there is some pathology at some of the levels from L1 through L3, a
physician could say, for example, “Based on the objective medical findings in the entire lumbar spinal sub-region, I
believe that the injured worker has lost 50% of ADL and work functioning, the final rating is 50% of 90% = 45%
WPI.”
Both of these methods would be appropriate alternative ways of rating spinal impairments by use of Figure 15-19
and assessing how much loss of function a person has for the entire spinal sub-region. This is true regardless of
how many levels of pathology exist in a spinal sub-region. The use of these two methods must be based on
substantial evidence—usually you would want to use this method when there is more than one level of a spinal sub-
region affected by an industrial injury. However, a physician may be able to justify one or both of these methods if
only one spinal level is involved, such as a L4-L5 disc herniation with a laminectomy and discectomy
decompression surgery with a poor clinical result.
5. Deconditioning method. This method is creative and unconventional but may be the most accurate in a severely
disabled injured worker whose pre-injury ADL and work functioning were normal and post-injury ADL and work
functioning severely compromised by an industrial injury or from a poor treatment outcome from one. The method
requires a physician to evaluate pre- and post-injury ADL and work functioning in detail. It requires a severe,
permanent medical condition to the spine, usually multiple sub-regions, with a poor result from treatment. The
physician may use Table 3-6a for coronary heart disease under a Class 4 (50% to 100% WPI rating) where the
injured worker has a <5 METS exercise ability or a Class 3 (30% to 49% WPI) where the injured worker has a
METS exercise ability that is >5 but <7.
A MET is a multiple of resting metabolic energy used for any given activity. For example, a man who weighs 154
pounds and who burns 1.2 kcal/min while sitting at rest uses about 3 METS while walking at 2.7 mph.
Page 4 of 4
§ 7.17 Example #9: Various Ways to Rebut Strict Spinal Impairment Ratings
A person with a METS of 5 or greater would be able to play 18 holes of golf, snow ski and walk 3–4 miles per hour
for 20 minutes or longer. A person with a METS of less than 5 would not be able to walk 3–4 miles per hour at all
and would not be able to engage in activities such as golfing or snow skiing. See Table 3-2 for a discussion of
METS testing using a treadmill or bicycle ergometric testing.
There is a case involving a special education school teacher who, while in her late teens, had stabilization surgery
for scoliosis of her thoracic and lumbar spine and required surgical implantation of two Herrington rods from T-1
through L-3. After recovering from the surgery, the teacher went on to become very active physically, including
regularly snow skiing and regularly exercising at a gym, including weight lifting and running. Her weight was within
normal limits for her height, age and body build. She lived a very active and healthy lifestyle. One day at school, she
had to lift a child who has cerebral palsy. The child could not navigate stairs at the school with his walker so the
teacher lifted him and carried him down four or five stairs.
While carrying him down the stairs the teacher severely injured her lumbar spine. Diagnostic imaging revealed
severe disc herniations at two levels below the Herrington rods. The injured teacher had the Herrington rods
surgically removed and a two level anterior interbody fusion surgery followed at L4-L5 and L5-S1.
After recovering from that surgery, the teacher gained 50 pounds, walked with difficulty and with a forward list and
could not engage in any of the physical activities she had grown accustomed to prior to her work injury. She was
able to return to work, but had to have an assistant help in the classroom for anything that required physical effort.
The injured teacher had to rely on others to assist her in everything except teaching duties.
An AME in orthopedic surgery opined that the permanent impairment rating under a strict use of the AMA Guides
was 32% WPI via the ROM method with 50% apportionment to the prior scoliosis and resulting Herrington rod
placement while she was a teenager and 50% due to the industrial injury of lifting the child. In his report, the AME
opined that the 32% WPI from the ROM method was really not accurate since the injured teacher was permanently
and severely handicapped in both her ADL functioning and work functioning.
The AME then utilized Table 3-6a for coronary heart disease and opined that a more accurate rating for this case
would be under a Class 4 50% to 100% WPI rating due to her deconditioning and inability to engage in activities
that required energy output of 5 METS or more. He assigned a 65% WPI rating before apportionment based on the
fact that she was able to return to work but needed assistance to perform her duties as a teacher. He then
apportioned 50% to the non-industrial scoliosis condition and 50% to industrial factors. This case is a great example
of how a physician may use “any chapter, table or method” in the AMA Guides to establish the most accurate rating
under the Almaraz-Guzman II case.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.18
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.18 Example #10: Reactive Airway Disease as a Result of Exposure to
Fumes
Alternative method: Rate using strict interpretation for listed objective medical condition and rate unlisted objective
medical condition using alternative Table or method.
A mammography technician developed reactive airway disease as a result of seven years of exposure to X-ray
machine developer and fixation chemicals. An AME found injury AOE/COE based on a review of the Material Safety
Data Sheets for the involved chemicals, which documented pulmonary and lung injury risk from exposure to these
chemicals if there is direct exposure or inadequate ventilation. The injured technician would have a severe onset of
shortness of breath and asthma like symptoms if she was exposed to any animal dander, dust, fumes or
particulates. Even fragrances from perfumes, cologne or after-shave products could cause a reaction. Light smells
in a room of people could also trigger a severe acute attack requiring immediate steroid and rescue inhaler
medications. The AME opined that the injured worker had to avoid any exposure to dust, fumes or particulates in
the work place and outside the work place. During pulmonary function testing, the AME ordered a methylcholine
challenge, which was positive for very low concentrations of irritants that would trigger an acute pulmonary episode.
Using Table 5-12, the AME rated the case as a Class 2, 20% WPI for a volume of oxygen deficit. During his
deposition, he opined that this rating was not completely accurate because of the severe limitations the injured
worker has in her exposures to environmental irritants both on and off the job. He opined that since she had a
positive methylcholine challenge, he would add 10% WPI because of those severe environmental limitations. Notice
here that “no exposure to dust, fumes and particulates in the work place” rated a 20% permanent disability standard
under the 1997 PDRS. However, the AME in this case did not use the 1997 PDRS to increase the WPI rating here.
He relied on the objective medical findings—the positive methylcholine study-to justify the environmental exposure
limitations she has at work and off work and to increase the WPI rating from a 20% WPI to a 30% WPI final rating.
The 30% WPI rating was based on two objective medical findings—the oxygen deficiency measurable under Table
5-12 and the positive methylcholine challenge that was not listed in the AMA Guides. Tables 5-10 and 5-11 and the
footnotes for use of the asthma WPI ratings do refer to methylcholine challenges, which positive results do increase
ratings for asthma conditions.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.19
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.19 Example #11: Recurrent Back Sprains
We know that many physicians believe that once a person has had a back sprain, that person is more susceptible
to suffering from recurrences of back sprains, which symptoms can be severe and incapacitating. However, in the
absence of any diagnostic imaging or neurological evidence of pathology, back sprains are a DRE Category I, 0%
WPI rating. Under Almaraz-Guzman I, recurrent back sprains can be rated using the Veteran’s Administration
Disability Guidelines and would rate a 20% WPI. However, since Almaraz-Guzman II now prohibits use of any other
impairment standards except for the “four corners of the AMA Guides 5th Edition,” an alternative rating method may
be appropriate in cases where recurrent back sprains are well documented.
A Class 2 hernia in Table 6-9 includes the criteria “frequent discomfort, precluding heavy lifting but not hampering
some activities of daily living.” Doesn’t this sound like a fine description of someone with recurrent back sprains? A
Class 2 hernia rates between a 10% WPI and a 19% WPI.
This example is another great example of how disparate the Guides are from chapter to chapter. A person with a
recurrent hernia has a potential 19% WPI strict rating under Chapter 6, while a person with a herniated lumbar disc
with surgery gets only a 10% to 13% strict WPI rating under a DRE Category III in Chapter 15. It appears both
persons would fall under the same description quoted above from a Chapter 6, Table 6-9 impairment rating. Why
does a recurrent hernia patient receive up to 19% WPI while a lumbar surgery patient only gets up to 13% WPI?
Who knows? This is why physicians must now justify any conclusions they make about any rating they come up
with in these cases.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 7.20
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 7
Developing the Record and Rebutting the 2005 PDRS
§ 7.20 Example #12: Carpenter’s Close Encounter With Table Saw
Strict rating: 15% WPI (see below)
Alternative rating method A: Add rating for functional impairment (grip loss) with rating for anatomic loss (15% WPI
from strict rating).
Alternative rating method B: Ask physician what percentage loss of use of the hand for ADL and work functions
exist due to permanent objective medical findings using Table 16-2.
This is a real case where a $15,000 compromise and release was submitted to a judge for approval, and the
question was whether the settlement was adequate and should be approved. In this case, the injured worker was
not represented by legal counsel, but the results here would apply regardless of whether or not the injured worker
was represented. A judge has a duty to develop the record if a proposed settlement that is submitted for approval is
deemed not adequate. The problem is, where does one draw a line between a judge’s duty in determining
adequacy of a settlement as opposed to his or her acting as an advocate for the injured worker? We will not get into
a discussion of this issue because of the broad discretion of workers’ compensation judges. However, judges are
free to send interrogatory questions to treating and evaluating physicians or order their testimony on medical-legal
issues as long as the parties are allowed to also make inquiries. This is true regardless of whether or not an injured
worker is represented by legal counsel.
In this case, the injured worker is a 29-year-old journeyman carpenter, who was cutting wood on a table saw when
the wood jammed and his left thumb, index and long fingers were lacerated by the blade. In addition to the complex
lacerations, the injured worker had: several open fractures, left hand; digital nerve laceration left index finger; inter-
articular fracture PIP joint left long finger; flexor tendon injury left index finger; loss of sensitivity of the ulnar border
of the left thumb; and partial amputations of the left thumb and left index finger.
The treating physician indicated MMI status one-year post injury and opined in his permanent and stationary report
the above-listed objective findings. In addition, in the physical examination section of his report, the physician
indicated that the injured worker lost 50% of his grip and pinch strength in his left hand. However, in his WPI rating
calculations, the physician did not include any reference to the functional impairment from the grip and pinch
strength loss. Instead, he assigned a 15% WPI rating utilizing the anatomic losses and using strict ratings from
Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides based on the left thumb partial amputation, loss of motion and sensory loss; left
index finger loss of motion, sensory loss and partial amputation; left middle finger loss of motion and passive
medial-lateral instability.
In addition, the physician opined that the injured worker was permanently restricted as follows: “… no performing
frequent repetitive gripping, grasping, holding and heavy lifting” with the left hand. The report does not state which
hand is dominant, but under a strict WPI rating under Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides, physicians do not take a
person’s dominant upper extremity side into account in establishing a rating.
The physician did not include in his WPI rating consideration for the documented 50% grip and pinch strength loss,
nor the documented cosmetic disfigurement to the injured worker’s left hand, thumb and fingers. In the final 15%
WPI rating, the physician accounted only for the anatomic deficits and did not include any consideration for the
functional deficits as a result of all objective medical findings.
Page 2 of 3
§ 7.20 Example #12: Carpenter’s Close Encounter With Table Saw
Remember, the question is whether a $15,000 compromise and release is adequate in this case. The 15% WPI
rated out to 19% permanent disability for a 29-year-old carpenter, which is equal to $16,215! So clearly, a $15,000
compromise and release is not adequate on its face! But neither is the medical report from the treating physician.
The first alternative rating method would require the physician to take into account all of the permanent objective
medical conditions and not just the measured losses of motion, sensory deficits, joint instability and partial
amputations, i.e., the anatomic deficits. In the physical examination section of the MMI report, the physician
indicated in the grip and pinch strength tests that the injured worker lost 50–60% of his strength on the left hand and
he was using good effort in using the dynamometer. If the physician had used Tables 16-31 through 16-34, he
would see that the injured worker would have a 12% WPI rating for the grip strength loss. If you add the 15% WPI
rating based on the anatomic loss to the 12% WPI grip strength loss based on the functional deficits, then the total
WPI rating would be 27% WPI. In addition, the physician never considered as part of the WPI rating any of the
cosmetic disfigurement of the left hand that he documented in the physical examination part of his report. The
cosmetic disfigurement would be ratable under Chapter 8 of the AMA Guides, but only 1–2% WPI.
The problem with the WPI measurements for anatomic losses is that there is nothing stated by the authors of
Chapter 16 that ties any of the anatomic impairment ratings into the effects of those losses on ADL functioning.
There is merely an assumption that each anatomic rating corresponds with some consideration for functional loss,
but no one knows what those precisely are. Also, as stated in Chapter 1 of the AMA Guides, the WPI ratings from
the entire book take only into account the effects of an impairment on ADL functioning, and there is no
consideration for work function impairment.
Thus, a physician or a judge, with the correct and reliable permanent objective medical findings, could justify adding
a WPI impairment rating based on anatomic losses to WPI ratings for functional losses in a case like this one. In
this case, when you read the actual strict ratings for digital, hand and ultimately WPI ratings, you cannot tell how
these ratings reflect how these anatomic deficits affect the injured worker’s hand function in either ADL or work
activities. Since a WPI rating must be accurate in terms of what the injured worker’s permanent disability is as a
result of this injury, a judge could justify adding the WPI rating for the anatomic losses to the WPI from the
functional losses as long as there is no evidence of overlap between the two, and in this case, there does not
appear to be any overlap between the two ratings.
The second alternative method of rating this case probably results in the same WPI rating as the first alternative
rating method discussed above. It appears that based on the permanent objective medical findings listed above,
including the grip and pinch strength loss, the sensory deficits, the partial amputations and the physician’s listed
permanent work restrictions that the injured worker lost 50% use of his left hand for ADL and work functions. Table
16-2 is a conversion chart that converts hand impairment to upper extremity impairment. Based on Table 16-2, the
hand is 90% of the upper extremity. We know that the upper extremity is 60% of the whole person, based on Table
16-3. So an amputated hand is 54% WPI (90% of 60%; see Figure 16-2 on page 441 of the AMA Guides for each
part of the upper extremity and the corresponding total loss of function for each sub-part). If an injured worker loses
50% of hand use for ADL and work functions, he or she would have a 27% WPI rating.
This second alternative method would require permanent objective medical findings such that exist in this case. It is
clear that this 29-year-old carpenter is significantly affected by this injury to his left hand. Since this injured worker is
not represented by legal counsel, the judge may send an interrogatory to the physician that simply asks: “Based
upon the objective findings that you list in the physical examination section of your report that are a result of this
industrial injury, what percentage of loss of use of the left hand does this applicant have with respect to ADL and
work functions? See Tables 16-2 and 16-3 of the AMA Guides 5th edition.”
Judges are permitted to send interrogatory letters to treating and evaluating physicians on medical-legal issues with
a Notice of Intention to Send Interrogatory to Physician that allows parties, represented or not by legal counsel, to
also ask written questions like this to the physician in lieu of live testimony by the physician. Due process
considerations require the judge to allow the parties to also ask a physician written questions, to object to questions
asked by the judge, or for the judge to order live medical testimony upon a finding of good cause.
Page 3 of 3
§ 7.20 Example #12: Carpenter’s Close Encounter With Table Saw
So does this case rate 15% WPI or 27% WPI? The strict rating under the AMA Guides would only permit the
anatomic impairments to be rated, which mysteriously include loss of ADL functions that are embedded within those
anatomic ratings. However, when you consider the loss of work functions in a case like this, which the AMA Guides
do not take into account, one or both of these two alternative rating methods probably result in a more accurate
permanent disability rating.
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp CHAPTER 8.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
CHAPTER 8 Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.01  Introduction
§ 8.02  Peer Review Defined
§ 8.03  Residual Functional Capacity
§ 8.04  Medical Resources
§ 8.05  Medical Glossary
§ 8.06  Medical Information
[1]  Overview
[2]  The Shoulder
[3]  The Knees
[4]  The Spine
[5]  Herniated Intervertebral Disc With Nerve Root Impingement
[6]  Spinal Canal and Neural Foraminal Stenosis
[7]  Spondylolisthesis
[8]  Spondylolysis
[9]  Spondylosis
[10]  Fractures
[11]  Zygoapophyseal Pain (Facet Joint Syndrome)
[12]  X-rays, MRI and CAT Scans
[13]  Discograms and Myelograms
[14]  Failed Lumbar Syndrome
[15]  Treatment in Chronic Pain Cases
[16]  Wrist and Hand
Page 2 of 3
Synopsis to CHAPTER 8 : Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
[a]  Three Main Nerves
[b]  Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
[c]  Current Medical Review
[17]  Other Upper Extremity Injuries—The Elbow
[18]  Other Upper Extremity Injuries—The Thumb
[19]  The Heart and Cardiovascular System
[20]  Arrhythmias
[21]  Coronary Artery Disease
[22]  Hypertension
[23]  Strokes
[24]  Concussions—Traumatic Brain Injuries
[25]  Diabetes
[26]  Opiate Addiction and Dependency
[a]  Opioids and Workers’ Compensation
[b]  The Grand Debate Over Opioids
[i]  Introduction
[ii]  California Workers’ Compensation System Response
[iii]  Understanding Morphine Equivalent Dose
[iv]  ACOEM Practice Guidelines for Opioids
[v]  Commentary and Analysis
[27]  Prescription Medicine Therapy Management
§ 8.07  Medications
§ 8.08  When to Develop the Record
[1]  Overview
[2]  Best Practices
§ 8.09  Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 3 of 3
Synopsis to CHAPTER 8 : Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 8.01
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.01 Introduction
This chapter provides you with medical information that you should know in order to understand medical reports,
subpoenaed medical records and to prepare for the cross-examination of physicians. The information provided in
this guidebook and specifically in this chapter is a result of years of taking depositions of physicians along with
independent medical research and 25 years of involvement in human subject medical research. Because the
science of medicine is ever changing and is never static, you should always consult with appropriate resources to
make sure all of your information is current and updated.
The studies of science and law have resulted in a gulf between scientific and legal analysis. Sometimes getting a
lawyer and a doctor together on an issue is problematic. Lawyers and physicians have a hard time understanding
each other—physicians like to heal people and attorneys like to win cases. Physicians battle disease while
attorneys battle each other. Physicians think scientifically, attorneys think analytically. Engineers who become
attorneys must be the most frustrated people on earth.
There are areas of the law and medicine that are inconsistent with each other but somehow must be reconciled in
terms of legal analysis coupled with scientific certainty. Take apportionment of permanent disability for instance.
Physicians are scientists who are trained to analyze facts based on objective evidence, and their conclusions are
based on clinical trials, strictly regulated research, medical evidence, clinical practices and experience. There is a
certainty or exactitude that is required by a physician in the diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of disease.
A physician who reads a passage from the AMA Guides such as “intervertebral disc or other soft tissue lesion” may
understand that only “soft tissue lesions” would apply in a given case [see AMA Guides, section II, Table 15-7, page
404, for spinal impairments based on the range of motion method]. An attorney would focus on the word “or” if he or
she wanted a rating to apply under this category if the person has facet joint disease that is not exactly a “soft tissue
lesion” but is more of a degenerative condition. Physicians strive for that exactitude while attorneys look for creative
uses of the language in a sentence or paragraph. In this example, there is no definition of “soft tissue lesion” to
begin with, nor is a definition provided by the authors of the AMA Guides for the term “palpable defect” in Table 6-9
for hernias. These examples provide fodder for attorneys to argue the meanings of these terms while physicians
may have different clinical definitions of them.
With respect to apportionment, scientific certainty and scientific analysis are left at the door. Physicians are
scientists by training and successive injuries to the same part of body means, scientifically, that a person’s
pathology, signs, symptoms and complaints are going to be enhanced after each successive injury. A series of
head concussions is a great example—say for a professional football player. Each successive concussion will have
a significant increase in signs, symptoms, complaints and long term effects than just one. It is impossible for any
physician to parcel out how much “impairment” or “permanent disability” is caused by each injury when the effects
of injuries to the same part of body are usually cumulative and not singularly identifiable especially in the context of
determining how much impairment is caused by each injury.
Attorneys on the other hand are trained to utilize the history, findings, language of statutes and regulations in order
to set forth specific information that the law requires, including parceling out causation of permanent disability to
each injury, which scientifically is impossible from a medical standpoint. It is clear that Labor Code §§ 4663 and
4664 were not written by physicians, nor were any consulted by the legislature. Labor Code § 4663(c) mandates a
physician to parcel out causation of permanent disability to industrial and non-industrial factors or to parcel out
Page 2 of 2
§ 8.01 Introduction
disability between successive injuries to the same part of body. Doing so is scientifically impossible in many cases
and goes against the medical model of “more than one is worse” rubric. However, the law requires physicians to do
just that, despite the scientific certainty medicine requires in every day practice.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 8.02
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.02 Peer Review Defined
Another issue to consider is the notion of “peer review.” When an attorney writes an article for publication (not as a
brief), there are no real standards for peer review prior to publication other than by an editor or editorial board to vet
the article. In order for an article on medicine to be published in legitimate publications, that article must first be
scrutinized under strict “peer review” standards, guidelines and protocols for scientific integrity and accuracy. In
publications such as the Journal of Internal Medicine, the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) or
the New England Journal of Medicine, each publication has strict publication guidelines for peer review before any
article appears in them.
In fact, the term “peer reviewed” is implied in Labor Code § 4604.5, which refers to medical treatment utilization
standards that are “evidence based medical treatment guidelines that are recognized generally by the national
medical community and scientifically based.” In the context of a medical publication, peer review means that
colleagues of the author who are specialists in the same area of medicine have read the article and vetted it for
scientific integrity. The peer reviewers must not be paid for their peer review work, and they cannot have any kind of
direct or indirect interest in the outcome of any research or conclusions from the published materials. Any such
interests must be disclosed at the time of publication. For example, Dr. Steve Feinberg and Dr. Mark Mandel both
separately peer reviewed the manuscript for the first edition of this guidebook and neither received any
compensation or other consideration for their efforts other than a thank you from the author and a written
acknowledgment in the guidebook itself.
NOTE:
Dr. Feinberg reviewed Ch. 8 of the guidebook and was compensated for his work. ■
When you ask a physician in a deposition what literature, if any, the physician is relying on, or if a physician
attached to his or her report a published article on a medical subject, you can almost always be sure that the article
has a certain amount of authority if the article was peer reviewed prior to publication. Many editorial boards will write
a commentary on the published work that is also separately published with the subject article.
However, that being said, there are elements of the politics of medicine and disagreement between specialists
about certain medical findings, the efficacy of diagnosis and treatment and current research results. There is always
an element of subjectivity by a peer review committee that may taint the underlying research or published article. So
you must always consider alternative points of view when researching medical issues that are controversial or
unsettled.
In addition, you must closely scrutinize references to medical “studies” that really are anecdotal rather than true
scientific research. There are many panel QME physicians who make reference to their own written articles or to
studies that have less than 20 participants in the research. Sample size of a medical study is a crucial element in
determining whether any scientific conclusions to the general population can be made based on a small sample of
subjects in any clinical research study.
Page 2 of 2
§ 8.02 Peer Review Defined
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 8.03
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.03 Residual Functional Capacity
Section 2.6 of the AMA Guides requires that a physician evaluate not only the WPI but also the residual functional
capacity of the person being evaluated who has an impairment. Residual functional capacity refers to the ability of a
person with an impairment to perform not only activities of daily living but also work activities. In order for a medical
report to constitute substantial evidence, a physician must consider the effects of an impairment on the person’s
ADL functioning and on their ability to perform daily work activities. Defendants would argue that only the ADLs
listed in Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA Guides apply. You can ask physicians about residual functional capacities
based on the following rubric:
NE
VE
R
0%
OC
C
0–
33
%
FREQUE
NTLY
33–75%
CONSTA
NTLY
>75%
SIT
STAND
WALK
BEND
STOOP
LIFT/CARRY 0–5#
LIFT/CARRY 6–
10#
SAMPLE RFC CHART—IF IW IS
LIFT/CARRY 11–
15#
MMI, CAN HE/SHE PERFORM
LIFT/CARRY 16–
20#
ESSENTIAL DUTIES OF U&C
LIFT/CARRY 21–
25#
OCCUPATION OR TRADE? CAN
IW
LIFT/CARRY 26–
30#
PERFORM GENERAL WORK
LIFT/CARRY 21–
50#
ACTIVITIES?
LIFT/CARRY >51#
Page 2 of 2
§ 8.03 Residual Functional Capacity
OVERHEAD
WORK
GROSS
MANIPULATION
FINE
MANIPULATION
This chart can be used as a reference for cross-examination of a physician in determining an injured worker’s ability
to perform work activities after being declared permanent and stationary or otherwise reaching maximum medical
improvement. The physician’s conclusions here may affect his or her conclusions about the accuracy of a WPI
rating under strict or alternative rating methods allowed under the AMA Guides.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 8.04
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.04 Medical Resources
When you are preparing to cross-examine a physician or when you encounter a medical condition that you need to
research, there are some very useful medical resources that are at your fingertips for reference. All of these
resources come from reliable, peer reviewed, publications and web sites:
• Webmd.com
• MERCK MANUAL®
• NATIONAL PUBLIC LIBRARY OF MEDICINE (www.nih.gov)—PUBMED
• COCHRANE REVIEWS (www.cochrane.org)
• ATTORNEY’S TEXTBOOK OF MEDICINE (Matthew Bender)
• OCCUPATIONAL INJURIES AND ILLNESSES (Matthew Bender)
• drugs.com
• emedicine.com
• mayoclinic.com/health/Diseaseindex
• biomedsearch.com
• ASK A PHYSICIAN ABOUT PUBLISHED LITERATURE
Webmd.com is a public access web site in which you can enter a medical condition and a fairly good search engine
will guide you to various resources, some in the public domain and others for a price, in order to learn about that
condition. This web site is oriented towards the public and non-physicians and its content is good for general
knowledge, but it is limited on more technical aspects of medical conditions. For example, if you searched the term
“myasthenia gravis” you would get a fairly decent description of the disorder and referral to a lot of self-help groups.
Every attorney should have access to the Merck Manual®. This publication is the “bible” of all practicing physicians.
The Merck Manual® is updated every seven years, with the most recent edition being the 18th Edition published in
2006. The book lists known diseases and disorders, how they are diagnosed, treated and their prognosis. Most
importantly, the Merck Manual® also describes the diagnostic criteria for diseases and disorders. The manual is
very technically written and can be difficult for lay people to understand but nevertheless, the Merck Manual® is a
must for attorneys to have in their libraries.
When you look up “myasthenia gravis” you get technical information that can be useful in understanding its
pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment and prognosis. The Merck Manual® was essential in assisting an attorney in
understanding this disorder in preparation for a social security disability hearing for a client whose primary medical
condition was myasthenia gravis.
The National Public Library of Medicine (“PUBMED”) is sponsored by the National Institutes of Health and access is
free on line—www.nih.gov. This resource has a very user friendly search engine in which you can enter a medical
condition, such as “carpal tunnel syndrome,” and get all of the latest medical information on that disorder that you
need for preparing to cross examine a physician. Did you know that certain thyroid conditions cause carpal tunnel
syndrome? Well, you can find it here!
Page 2 of 3
§ 8.04 Medical Resources
The Cochrane Reviews (www.cochrane.org) is a compendium of research studies that have been published by
peer-reviewed, nationally recognized publications. You have public access to the abstracts of research studies, but
you have to pay to obtain copies of the actual studies themselves. This is a good resource to go to if you are
dealing with a controversial medical condition such as thoracic outlet syndrome, fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue
syndrome, metabolic syndrome or diabetes. Also you can access information on risk factors such as obesity, race,
gender, smoking, sedentary lifestyles, degenerative arthritis and aging.
The Attorney’s Textbook of Medicine (Matthew Bender) was written specifically for attorneys who need an accurate
description of medical conditions that are usually caused by trauma, toxic exposures and other assorted medical
conditions that are a subject of litigation. This Matthew Bender & Co. Inc. (part of the LexisNexis Group) publication
is detailed and readily available on line, in print, or both.
Another Matthew Bender medicolegal treatise is Occupational Injuries and Illnesses. This treatise covers every
major type of occupational injury and illness, its diagnosis, treatment and possible methods of prevention in the
occupational setting.
The website drugs.com is a public access site that allows you a quick reference to the chemical and brand names
of medications, their use and known side effects.
Another resource for you to pay close attention to is the physical examination and laboratory results sections that
are embedded in a medical-legal report from an evaluating or treating physician. Oftentimes, physicians forget
about physical findings on examination or laboratory results that they ordered as part of a medical-legal
examination. If there are any abnormalities noted in the physical examination section or laboratory results, you
should ask the physician about those abnormalities. Oftentimes, the abnormality can be ratable as a recognized
impairment from the AMA Guides.
For example, recently an AME examined a police officer who had heart by-pass surgery and during the surgery the
officer suffered “total organ failure,” which he survived. While uncommon, total organ failure is a known risk of heart
surgery, and the officer’s liver and kidneys shut down. The officer eventually recovered from this ordeal and
returned to gainful work activities. Three years after the by-pass surgery, the AME in internal medicine examined
him and wrote a comprehensive medical-legal report. Attached to his report was routine blood work including liver
and kidney function testing that showed significant liver abnormalities.
The AME never mentioned any impairment for the liver function abnormalities in his permanent and stationary
report. In his deposition, the abnormalities were pointed out to the AME as well as the fact that they were ratable
under Table 6-7 of the AMA Guides, which added 10% WPI to the underlying ratings for the heart and hypertension
conditions, taking the case to a life pension level of permanent disability. The abnormal laboratory findings made a
huge difference in the outcome of the officer’s case, without which the overall permanent disability rating would
have been under a life pension level.
Another example is in a knee injury case in which a treating physician evaluated a partial medial meniscectomy that
rated 1% WPI under Table 17-33. Included in the physical findings on examination section of the doctor’s report
was A-P standing x-rays of both knees that showed less than a 1mm cartilage interval on the medial side of the
injured knee and 4mm on the uninjured knee. The applicant had significant subjective complaints post surgery and
the reason was that he was almost bone on bone in the same area he had the injury to the knee joint—he was a
candidate for a total knee replacement! A judge had to order a panel QME to determine whether or not the loss of
cartilage was due to the industrial injury and if so to properly rate the arthritis under Table 17-31 along with the
meniscus injury under Table 17-33.
So you can see how the details of the physical examination section of a medical report along with laboratory
findings can change a rating. This raises a question commonly asked about taking depositions of physicians—we
are told in law school not to argue medicine with a physician—only argue the facts or the law. In this day and age,
can attorneys argue medicine with a physician? Yes, it happens every day in our cases because physicians are still
on a learning curve on using the AMA Guides and miss many ratable medical conditions.
Page 3 of 3
§ 8.04 Medical Resources
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 8.05
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.05 Medical Glossary
This list is intended to be a quick and convenient guide to terminology often used by workers’ compensation
practitioners. It is not intended to be exhaustive or definitive. When in doubt, counsel should seek consultation with
a forensic specialist to fully define and place medical conditions and tests in perspective. The definitions are
intended to place explanations in layperson’s terms, for quick and easy reference while reading medical
evaluations.
ACDF—Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion. This is the removal of a cervical (neck) disc with the mechanical
binding of the vertebrae above and below the disc, from an approach at the front of the neck. It can be
accomplished with cadaver bone graft, the patient’s own bone, or a “cage” made of a composite of materials. See
http://acdf-surgery.com/
AC joint—acromioclavicular joint
ACL—anterior cruciate ligament
Adhesive capsulitis—“frozen shoulder”
Adson’s test—A test for thoracic outlet syndrome; with the patient in a sitting position, the hands resting on the
thighs, the examiner palpates both radial pulses as the patient rapidly fills the lungs by deep inhalation and holding
the breath, hyperextends the neck and turns the head toward the affected side. If the radial pulse on that side is
decidedly
or
completely
obliterated,
the
result
is
positive.
See
https://medical-
dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Adson+maneuver
ALIF—Anterior lumbar interbody fusion. This is a lumbar disc fusion performed from the frontal approach, through
the abdomen. Currently, many surgeons combine it with a posterior approach as well, implanting a cage into the
cleared interspace for stability and complete fusion. See Spine J. 2002 May–Jun;2(3):216–23.
Allograft—replacement of a body part or system by a donor’s body part or system, usually a cadaver; e.g., an ACL
replacement or spinal fusion using irradiated cadaver bone
Anterior—front
AP x-ray view—anterior to posterior view (front to back)
Arthrography—Arthrography is often used to help diagnose the cause of unexplained joint pain. A contrast iodine
solution is injected into the joint area to help highlight the joint structures, such as the ligaments, cartilage, tendons,
and joint capsule. Plain film x-rays, CT scan, or MRI may then be used to provide an enhanced image of the joint.
See https://www.surgeryencyclopedia.com/A-Ce/Arthrography.html
Arthroplasty—removal and replacement of bone with or without an artificial implant
Autograft—the use of a patient’s own tissue for surgical repair or replacement, e.g., using the patient’s own iliac
crest bone harvest for a spinal fusion
Axial—from the top, also “coronal,” applies to x-rays, MRI and CT scans
Page 2 of 9
§ 8.05 Medical Glossary
Body Mass Index (BMI)—a mathematical formula that measures obesity taking into account height and weight
ratios (for a useful BMI calculator, see http://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/assessing/bmi/)
Bone Scan—The triphase bone scan is used to identify areas where there is unusually active bone formation. It is
frequently used to pinpoint stress fracture sites or the presence of arthritis, infection, or cancer. About three hours
before the scan, the patient is given a radioactive solution based on iodine. The bone scan itself is performed about
three hours later, which gives the bone time to absorb the radio-opaque substance. As the patient lies on a table, a
special nuclear camera takes a picture of the entire body. This process takes 30 to 90 minutes. Areas of abnormal
bone
formation
activity
will
appear
brighter
than
the
rest
of
the
skeleton.
See
http://www.wheelessonline.com/ortho/triphasic_bone_scan
Bursitis—inflammation of bursa—the lining of a joint
Chondral—relating to cartilage; “chondral changes” means there are changes to the cartilage such as
degeneration from arthritis
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)—The NIH defines CRPS as a chronic pain condition most often
affecting one of the limbs (arms, legs, hands, or feet), usually after an injury or trauma to that limb. CRPS is
believed to be caused by damage to, or malfunction of, the peripheral and central nervous systems. The central
nervous system is composed of the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous system involves nerve
signaling from the brain and spinal cord to the rest of the body. CRPS is characterized by prolonged or excessive
pain and mild or dramatic changes in skin color, temperature, and/or swelling in the affected area.
There are two similar forms, called CRPS-I and CRPS-II, with the same symptoms and treatments. CRPS-II
(previously called causalgia) is the term used for patients with confirmed nerve injuries. Individuals without
confirmed nerve injury are classified as having CRPS-I (previously called reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome).
Some research has identified evidence of nerve injury in CRPS-I, so the validity of the two different forms is being
investigated.
The Budapest Criteria is now adopted by the medical community to diagnose Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
(CRPS):
A: The patient has continuing pain which is disproportionate to the inciting event
B: The patient has at least one sign in two or more of the categories
C: The patient reports at least one symptom in three or more of the categories
D: No other diagnosis can better explain the signs and symptoms
Sensory: Allodynia (to light touch and/or temperature sensation and/or deep somatic pressure and/or joint
movement) and/or hyperalgesia (to pinprick)
Vasomotor: Temperature asymmetry (more than 1 deg.) and/or skin colour changes and/or skin color asymmetry
Sudomotor/Edema: Edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating asymmetry
See http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/reflex_sympathetic_dystrophy/detail_reflex_sympathetic_dystrophy.htm
Motor/trophic: Decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic
changes (hair/nail/skin)
Computed Tomography (CT Scan)—A CT scan combines X-rays with computer technology to produce a more
detailed, cross-sectional image of the body. It may be ordered if plain x-rays do not diagnose a bone condition that
is clinically indicated. A computer combines the images to produce a clear, two-dimensional view on a television
screen.
Page 3 of 9
§ 8.05 Medical Glossary
COPD—Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. COPD is a disease of the lungs often caused or aggravated by
occupational conditions, as well as smoking. It is made up of two separate but related conditions: In emphysema,
the walls between many of the air sacs are damaged. As a result, the air sacs lose their shape and tone. This
damage also can destroy the walls of the air sacs, leading to fewer and larger air sacs instead of many tiny ones. If
this happens, the amount of gas exchange in the lungs is reduced. In chronic bronchitis, the lining of the airways is
constantly irritated and inflamed. This causes the lining to thicken. A high volume of thick mucus forms in the
airways, making it hard to breathe. Pulmonary function studies are the preferred method for diagnosing COPD. A
ratio of FEV1/FVC of less than 70% will trigger the ultimate diagnosis of COPD, when a medication called a
bronchodilator is first employed. The ratio FEV1/FVC is a ratio of the amount of air exhaled forcefully in one second
over the amount of air that can be forcefully exhaled with a complete breath over how long it takes. The letters
stand for forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) over forced vital capacity (FVC). See
http://goldcopd.org/pocket-guide-copd-diagnosis-management-prevention-2016/
Coronal x-ray view—from above, looking down
Crepitation—cracking, popping, grating sound, usually in the knee [see AMA Guides, Ch. 17, Table 17-31 footnote
which adds pain as a component]
DDD—degenerative disc disease
Debridement—surgical removal of torn or dead tissue
Discography—Discography is a test used to determine whether the discs, the cushioning pads that separate the
bones of the spine, and medication is used to numb the skin over the test site. During the procedure, the doctor
inserts a needle into one or more discs and injects a contrast dye. The patient will feel pain when the dye is
introduced into the problem disc. Afterward, a CT scan will show any changes in the disc size or shape. See
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1145703-overview
Distal—away from the center axis of the body or heart
DJD—degenerative joint disease
Electromyography—An electromyography (EMG) records and analyzes the electrical activity in muscles. It is used
to learn more about the functioning of nerves in the arms and legs. For example, a fracture of the humerus may tear
or pinch the radial nerve. An EMG can be used to identify the damage if nerve function does not return within four
months of the injury. EMG testing is commonly used to confirm radicular symptoms emanating from disc
herniations. During an EMG, small gauge needles are placed in the muscle to record the electrical activity. The
doctor will ask the patient to relax the muscle and then to tense it slightly. The electrical signals generated by
muscles are broadcast on a TV-like screen. See Aminoff, Michael Jeffrey. Electromyography in clinical practice:
electrodiagnostic aspects of neuromuscular disease. Churchill Livingstone, 1987.
ESI—epidural steroid injections
ETOH—“alcohol”—we see it in medical records as “ETOH abuse,” which means the patient abuses alcohol or is an
alcoholic
Flick Test—This is a simple test for carpal tunnel syndrome. The patient is asked to shake both hands, held
thumbs-up, for 30 seconds or so, as if shaking down a thermometer. If they begin to develop numbness and
tingling, it is a positive test for median nerve problems. See Clinical Utility of the Flick Maneuver in Diagnosing
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome, American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation: May 2004, Vol. 83, Issue 5, pp.
363–367
Glenohumeral joint—joint in shoulder where the upper humerus bone meets the four tendons and muscles that
form the rotator cuff
Hemorrhagic stroke—a blood vessel leaks or bursts causing blood to leak depriving part of the brain of oxygen
Page 4 of 9
§ 8.05 Medical Glossary
Herniated disc—The disc herniation is perhaps the most politically explosive term in workers’ compensation
litigation. Surgeons, radiologists, neurosurgeons, and orthopedists all embrace differing terminology as to whether a
damaged disc is degenerative, herniated, protruding, prolapsed, bulging, desiccated, or extruded. The disc is
cartilage, composed of the annulus fibrosis, a harder outer shell of cartilage, and the nucleus pulposus, the softer
inner cushion. When the disc becomes less concentric, and is not confined to the circumference of the vertebrae
above and below, it is said to be bulging, and if further from concentric, it is said to be herniated, particularly when
the nucleus pulposus extrudes. The rest is subject to debate as to clinical importance and radiological relevance.
The clinical neurological indications for lumbar disc herniations are as follows, in short:
Disc
Location of Pain
Motor Deficit
T12-L1
Pain in inguinal
region and medial
thigh
None
L1-2
Pain in anterior
and medial
aspect of upper
thigh
Slight weakness
in quadriceps;
slightly
diminished
suprapatellar
reflex
L2-3
Pain in
anterolateral thigh
Weakened
quadriceps;
diminished
patellar or
suprapatellar
reflex
L3-4
Pain in
posterolateral
thigh and anterior
tibial area
Weakened
quadriceps;
diminished
patellar reflex
L4-5
Pain in dorsum of
foot
Extensor
weakness of big
toe and foot
L5-S1
Pain in lateral
aspect of foot
Diminished or
absent Achilles
reflex
See Clinical Evaluation and Treatment Options for Herniated Lumbar Disc, Am Fam Physician. 1999 Feb
1;59(3):575–582
Hypertrophy—something is enlarged or larger than normal
Hypokinesis—not moving fast enough, diminished or abnormally slow movement
Iatrogenic—something bad caused by a doctor, e.g., iatrogenic addiction or injury
Impairment (v. Disability)—The sixth edition of the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, published
by the American Medical Association (AMA), defines impairment as “a significant deviation, loss, or loss of use of
any body structure or body function in an individual with a health condition, disorder, or disease.” The AMA Guides
define disability as “activity limitations and/or participation restrictions in an individual with a health condition,
disorder, or disease.” One injured worker can be impaired significantly and have no disability, while another injured
worker can be very disabled by only a limited impairment. New Jersey does not apply the AMA Guidelines, as they
are measures of impairment, not disability.
Inferior—lower or below
Ischemic stroke—narrowing or blockage of artery in the brain that causes a stroke, usually from a blood clot
Page 5 of 9
§ 8.05 Medical Glossary
IVDA—a patient is an “intravenous drug abuser”
Knee tests—Perhaps the most common knee injuries generated in the workplace are tears of the medial and
lateral meniscus, and the anterior cruciate ligament. Other injuries do present, including quadriceps tears, patella
tendon ruptures, and all manner of fractures and other disruptions of cartilage, ligaments, and tendons. These are
some of the common clinical tests for knee injuries, useful to the practitioner in reading medical reports and records,
and formulating direct and cross-examination.
The McMurray test is commonly employed to determine tears of the meniscus. In the McMurray test the knee is
flexed while the leg is externally rotated, palpating the joint line with a finger. Then the knee is slowly extended. The
test for lateral meniscus is carried out by internally rotating the leg. Pain or a crackling sound is felt when the
condyle engages in the meniscal lesion.
The Bragard’s test is also preferred by some orthopedists for meniscal diagnosis. In Bragard’s test, external tibial
rotation and knee extension bring the meniscus more anterior; if tenderness is felt along the joint line during
palpation, an articular surface irregularity, a chondral defect or a meniscal tear is suspected.
In Steinmann’s first test the knee is held flexed at 90° and forced to external rotation, then internal rotation. The test
is positive for medial meniscal tear if it causes pain upon externally rotating, while it is positive for lateral meniscal
tears in case of pain during internal rotation.
In Steinmann’s second test joint line tenderness migrates posteriorly with knee flexion and anteriorly with knee
extension, following the movements of the meniscus.
Apley’s grinding test is carried out with the patient prone and the knee flexed to 90°. Then the leg is twisted and
pulled, then pushed. If pain is felt only while pushing, a meniscal lesion is diagnosed, while if no difference between
distraction and compression is detected, a chondral lesion is more likely.
The tests for actual instability in the knee, often due to a ligament tear, are different from tests for cartilage defects.
Instability is commonly defined with a direction (anterior, posterior, medial, lateral, rotatory), which is the position the
proximal tibia can abnormally reach with respect to the distal femur. There may be single, or multiple, structures
involved. The main structures involved keeping the knee stable are: ACL, PCL, MCL, LCL, posterolateral corner
and posteromedial corner. The many tests can be divided into four groups: stress tests, slide tests, pivot shift (jerk)
tests, and rotational tests.
The anterior cruciate ligament and posterior cruciate ligament are tested by the use of slide tests. With these tests
the examiner slides the tibia, trying to subluxate it from the distal femur.
Anterior and Posterior Drawer Test is the most commonly used test for ACL and PCL evaluation. The tests have to
be carried out in three different tibial rotational positions: neutral and at 30° of internal and external rotation. Internal
rotation tightens the PCL and the posterolateral corner, so that the anterior drawer can become negative in this
position. In the neutral position the tibial plateau and the medial condyle face one another, with a slight anterior
step-off of the tibia (approximately 0.5–1 cm); this has to be taken as the “zero point” for anterior and posterior
drawer evaluation.
The Lachman test is the easier and common test for ACL evaluation. It is very useful in those cases when the knee
is examined in the first days after injury, with the knee swollen and very painful. The test is performed holding the
knee in full extension and at 30° flexion, and slightly externally rotated. As in the drawer test, besides the amount of
anterior dislocation, the doctor notes carefully the quality of the endpoint: a soft stop is very predictive for ACL
rupture, while a hard stop can indicate an intact ACL.
See Knee Physical Examination, http://orthosurg.ucsf.edu/oti/patient-care/divisions/sports-medicine/physical-
examination-info/knee-physical-examination/ and http://stanfordmedicine25.stanford.edu/the25/knee.html
Labrum—a lip shaped edge, rim, or structure—usually the hip or shoulder
Page 6 of 9
§ 8.05 Medical Glossary
LaSegue Test—The straight leg raise, as it is also called, is a test done during the physical examination to
determine whether a patient with low back pain has an underlying herniated disk, often located at L5 (fifth lumbar
spinal nerve). The doctor engages in passive dorsiflexion of the foot in the supine patient with the knee and hip
extended; back pain with this indicates nerve root compression or impingement.
Lateral—to the outside areas of the body, away from the center axis, e.g., lateral side of the knee means the outer
or far side of the knee
Ligaments—fibrous material that connect bone to bone
Ligament laxity—a joint is loose because the ligament is stretched or torn; laxity causes instability of a joint
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)—An MRI uses magnetic fields and a sophisticated computer to take high-
resolution pictures of bones and soft tissues, resulting in a cross-sectional image of the body. It can be used to help
diagnose torn muscles, ligaments and cartilage, herniated disks, hip or pelvic problems, and other conditions.
Medial—inside, towards the center axis of the body, e.g., medial side of the knee refers to the knee area that is
between the legs or towards the center axis of the body
Microdiscectomy—A lumbar surgical procedure where the back muscles are moved, not cut, and the membrane
covering the nerve roots is retracted, allowing removal of disc material and widening of the space between the disc
and the nerve root. It is especially useful for radiating pain down the leg, not particularly for severe back pain. See
http://www.columbianeurosurgery.org/specialties/spine/procedures/surgical/microdiscectomy/
Morbidity—“disease”; in our context, “pre-morbidity” means prior to an industrial injury (“Co-morbidity” means
multiple disease processes—someone with a physical injury might have a psychiatric comorbidity)
Mortality—death
MTUS—Medical Treatment Utilization Schedule, which is mandated by Lab. Code § 5307.27 and is found at 8 Cal.
Code Reg. § 9792.20
Muscle Tests—Because muscles are soft tissues, they do not appear on X-rays. So muscle testing is an important
part of the physical examination. Weakness in a muscle may indicate injury to the tendons that connect the muscle
to bone, injury to the nerves that enervate the muscle, or a generalized weakness of the muscle itself from disuse.
To test the strength of muscles, a physician may ask a patient to move in certain ways while he or she applies a
resistive force.
Myelopathy—any disease or disorder of the spinal cord
Myocardial infarction—heart attack
Myofascitis—This is the inflammation of a muscle.
Nerve Conduction Study (NCS)—Nerve conduction studies are often performed along with an electromyogram to
determine if a nerve is functioning normally. It is useful for symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome or ulnar nerve
entrapment. The doctor conducting the test will tape wires (electrodes) to the skin in various places along the nerve
pathway. Then the doctor stimulates the nerve with an electric current. As the current travels down the nerve
pathway, the electrodes placed along the way capture the signal and measure its speed. In healthy nerves,
electrical signals can travel at speeds of up to 120 miles per hour. If the nerve is damaged, however, the signal will
be slower and weaker. By stimulating the nerve at various places, the doctor can determine the specific site of the
injury. Nerve conduction studies also may be used during treatment to test the progress being made. EMG and
NCV
testing
is
often
administered
by
neurologists
and
physiatrists.
See
http://orthoinfo.aaos.org/topic.cfm?topic=a00270
Neurogenic pain—pain that comes from a nerve injury or the nervous system, usually burning type pain
Page 7 of 9
§ 8.05 Medical Glossary
NSAIDS—non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin, Ibuprofen, or naproxen (Advil®, Motrin®),
naproxen (Aleve®), Celebrex®, Dolobid®
ORIF—“open reduction, internal fixation”; referring to repair of a broken bone that is surgically repaired with internal
hardware installed to stabilize the bone while it heals
Osteoarthritis—“osteo-” refers to bone; “arthritis” refers to degenerative changes and inflammation
Parenteral—introducing something into the body by means other than by mouth, specifically means by intravenous,
subcutaneous, intramuscularly, or intramedullary (soft tissue such as bone marrow) injection
Patrick’s test or FABER test (for Flexion, Abduction, and External Rotation)—This test is performed to
evaluate pathology of the hip joint or the sacroiliac joint. The tested leg is flexed, abducted, and externally rotated. If
pain is elicited on the ipsilateral side anteriorly, it is suggestive of a hip joint disorder on the same side.
PCL—posterior cruciate ligament
Phalen’s test—This is a simple test for carpal tunnel syndrome. The physician first asks the patient to put his/her
elbows on the table. Then he asks the patient to pull his/her wrists in maximal flexion and to hold this position for at
least one minute. The test is intended to provoke symptoms of CTS by increasing the pressure within the carpal
tunnel. See http://www.turner-white.com/pdf/hp_jul00_tinel.pdf
PLIF—Posterior lumbar interbody fusion is a lumbar disc surgery performed from the rear approach, employing an
implant to take the place of the removed, herniated disc. Most commonly, surgeons use a cage made of a
composite of materials to stimulate and approximate fusion, removing unnatural or damaging motion between the
fused levels of the spine. See https://www.orthogate.org/patient-education/lumbar-spine/posterior-lumbar-interbody-
fusion
Posterior—back or from behind
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)—Diagnostic criteria for PTSD include a history of exposure to a
traumatic event that meets specific stipulations and symptoms from each of four symptom clusters: intrusion,
avoidance, negative alterations in cognitions and mood, and alterations in arousal and reactivity. The sixth criterion
concerns duration of symptoms; the seventh assesses functioning; and, the eighth criterion clarifies symptoms as
not attributable to a substance or co-occurring medical condition. See http://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/PTSD-
overview/dsm5_criteria_ptsd.asp
Prodromal—the early symptoms of a disease process (e.g., shortness of breath, early onset of chest pain, and
sweating are prodromal signs of a heart attack)
Prophylactic—preventative; protecting against infection or disease
Proximal—towards the center axis of the body or the heart
Radiculitis—This is the inflammation of a spinal nerve root, especially of the portion of the root that lies between
the spinal cord and the spinal canal.
Range of Motion Testing—Range of motion tests may also be called flexibility tests. They are used to measure
how well a joint function. Some joints like the thumb and shoulder have a wide range of motion, almost a complete
circle. Other joints, like the knee, are like hinges and have a more limited range of motion. Range of motion tests
may be active or passive. In active tests, the patient will do all the movement. In passive tests, the doctor will hold
the extremity and move it. He or she may also hold the next joint steady to isolate the movement of the joint being
tested. For example, while the patient is seated, the doctor may hold the lower leg still while moving the heel in and
out.
Resection—removal; usually removal of bone
Page 8 of 9
§ 8.05 Medical Glossary
Rhyzotomy—Radiofrequency nerve root rhizotomy procedure creates lesions on the medial branch of dorsal facet
nerves; the dorsal facet nerves carry impulses from painful facets to the spinal cord; by creating a burned lesion in
the nerve this pain pathway can be temporarily broken; the effects of rhyzotomies last between 12 and 16 months
before the facet nerves regenerate
Sagital x-ray view—from the side
Sarcopenia—loss of muscle mass with replacement of fat—the physiology of aging (“frailty”) is similar to the
physiology of inactivity due to an injury
Shoulder tests—These are the clinical tests an orthopedist will typically perform if there is suspicion of shoulder
injury. They are not an exhaustive list, and are often used in conjunction with radiological studies, as well as
administration of injections.
Apley scratch test
Patient touches
superior and
inferior aspects of
opposite scapula
Loss of range of
motion: rotator
cuff problem
Neer’s sign
Arm in full flexion
Subacromial
impingement
Hawkins’ test
Forward flexion of
the shoulder to 90
degrees and
internal rotation
Supraspinatus
tendon
impingement
Drop-arm test
Arm lowered
slowly to waist
Rotator cuff tear
Cross-arm test
Forward elevation
to 90 degrees
and active
adduction
Acromioclavicular
joint arthritis
Spurling’s test
Spine extended
with head rotated
to affected
shoulder while
axially loaded
Cervical nerve
root disorder
Apprehension
test
Anterior pressure
on the humerus
with external
rotation
Anterior
glenohumeral
instability
Relocation test
Posterior force on
humerus while
externally rotating
the arm
Anterior
glenohumeral
instability
Sulcus sign
Pulling downward
on elbow or wrist
Inferior
glenohumeral
instability
Yergason test
Elbow flexed to
90 degrees with
forearm pronated
Biceps tendon
instability or
tendonitis
Speed’s
maneuver
Elbow flexed 20
to 30 degrees
and forearm
supinated
Biceps tendon
tear or tendonitis
“Clunk” sign
Rotation of
loaded shoulder
from extension to
forward flexion
Injury to the
labrum
See http://www.uptodate.com/contents/physical-examination-of-the-shoulder
Page 9 of 9
§ 8.05 Medical Glossary
SLAP lesion—Superior Labrum Anterior to Posterior lesion which is a torn lining of the shoulder joint from the front
top of the joint to the back of the joint
S/P—“status post” referring to a patient’s prior history of illness or treatment
Spurling’s Test—The Spurling test is a medical procedure used to assess radicular pain. The physician turns the
patient’s head to the affected side while extending and applying downward pressure to the top of the patient’s head.
A positive Spurling’s sign is noted when the pain arising in the neck radiates in the direction of the corresponding
dermatome located on the same side of the body as the test is administered. It is alternatively called the foraminal
compression test. See http://www.medilexicon.com/medicaldictionary.php?t=90833
Standing x-rays—performed while patient is standing up and measures interval cartilage in knee joint for extent of
osteoarthritis and other pathologies
Superior—top part or largest part of something
SWAG—scientific wild-assed guess
Tendons—fibrous material that connect muscles to bone
Tendonitis—inflammation of a tendon
Tinel’s sign—The physician percusses the nerve, manually, to elicit numbness, usually in the palm of the hand, to
indicate carpal tunnel syndrome, but on other peripheral nerves, as well, including the feet. See J South Orthop
Assoc. 1997 Fall;6(3):186–9.
Troponin level—blood test that detects heart wall damage from a heart attack; up to 0.18 is normal
WNL—within normal limits
XLIF—The XLIF (eXtreme Lateral Interbody Fusion) is surgery in which the surgeon accesses the intervertebral
disc space and fuses the lumbar spine using a surgical approach from the side rather than from the front (anterior)
or the back (posterior). See http://ortho.broadcastmed.com/3593/specialties/orthopedic-surgery/the-xlif-procedure-
a-minimally-disruptive-surgical-treatment-for-degenerative-spine-conditions
(Parts of this glossary were reprinted from LexisNexis Practice Guide New Jersey Workers’ Compensation)
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 8.06
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.06 Medical Information
[1] Overview
Subsections [2]–[27], below, describe specific parts of body commonly seen in our cases and some medical
information that should be useful to attorneys and judges to understand them. Most of the information in this
section is derived from deposition testimony from physicians who are experts in their respective fields and
specialties, along with resources from the references described above and finally as a result of recent and
emerging medical research.
[2] The Shoulder
The shoulder joint is an unusual joint compared to the other joints in the human body. It is a ball and socket
joint, much like the hip joint but with a twist. The hip’s ball and socket are both made of bone, covered by
articulating surfaces of cartilage so that the joint moves freely and smoothly. The hip joint and the shoulder joint
both move in six ranges of motion.
In contrast to the hip joint, the shoulder joint includes the ball, which consists of the head of the humerus bone,
and the socket, which are four tendons that connect four muscles. The four tendons and muscles comprise the
“socket” part of the shoulder joint. This area is known as the “rotator cuff,” which allows, for example, a
professional baseball pitcher to throw a baseball overhead to the catcher at close to 100 mph. There is no bone
substrate for the shoulder socket.
The four tendons and muscles that comprise the rotator cuff are referred to as “SITS,” which are the initials for
Supraspinatus, Infraspinatus, Teres Minor and Subscapulis. The deltoid muscle allows you to raise your arm.
So the rotator cuff supports the glenohumeral joint. Table 16-18 on page 499 of the AMA Guides lists the
maximum upper extremity and whole person impairment ratings for each joint for the upper extremities. If a
person loses function of the entire glenohumeral joint, then there is a 36% WPI rating. The acromioclavicular
(AC) joint is worth a maximum of 15% WPI.
This configuration allows the shoulder to move in six different ranges of motion—flexion, extension, abduction,
adduction, internal rotation, and external rotation.
The acromion is a bone that is part of the shoulder and attaches at the shoulder blade and the clavicle (collar
bone). The acromion is essentially the bone at the top of your shoulder. A “downsloping acromion” means that
the acromion is tilted downward, and in some people the downslope can be significant, especially in women.
There are four grades of downsloping acromion, Grades 1, 2, 3, and 4. The higher the grade, the more
downsloping. The clinical significance of a downsloping acromion is that a person is at higher risk of developing
an impingement syndrome.
The acromioclavicular joint (AC joint) is where the acromion meets the clavicle or collar bone. This joint allows
you to move your arm towards the opposite side of your body. It also allows you to lift objects in front of you
away from your body while reaching out with both arms. Certain types of jobs require significant amount of
lifting away from the body, especially in the health care industry. Health care professionals have a high
incidence of shoulder and spinal injuries because the mechanics of lifting a person or a part of a person, such
as his or her leg, is usually away from the lifter’s own body.
Page 2 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
Many work related injuries to the shoulder involve impingement syndromes. There are basically three types of
shoulder impingement: AC joint, rotator cuff or acromion. They are usually diagnosed by physical examination,
x-ray or MRI scan.
AC joint impingement occurs when there are bone spurs, arthritic changes or injuries to the distal clavicle, the
acromion or both. This is treated by way of a Mumford procedure in which a distal clavicle resection
arthroplasty is performed. The surgeon removes the distal end of the clavicle and shaves the end of the
acromion in order to provide smooth surfaces. Scar tissue fills in where the AC joint used to be and the patient
is no longer in pain from the impingement between the distal clavicle and the acromion.
There is a conflict between two tables for WPI ratings for this type of surgery in the AMA Guides—Table 16-27
specifically lists “distal clavicle resection arthroplasty” and rates it as a 10% upper extremity rating, which is
equal to a 6% WPI rating. However, the maximum value of the AC joint under Table 16-18 is a 15% WPI rating.
So which rating is more accurate: 15% WPI or 6% WPI? This is one of the 300 errors in the AMA Guides 5th
Edition. The most common complaints patients have after a Mumford procedure is that they have a difficult time
lifting objects away from the body, performing overhead activities and a loss of strength for flexion, adduction
and internal rotation.
A rotator cuff tear is another form of impingement we see in our cases along with the formation of bone spurs
on the humeral head that causes impingement on the tendons creating pain and limitation of motion of the
shoulder joint. The glenohumeral joint is supported by the four tendons, and the tendons can become partially
torn or completely “through and through” torn. If a tear is significant, the surgeon will use metal anchors to re-
establish the anatomic position of the tendon. Usually upon any rotator cuff injury, the injured worker suffers
acute burning-type pain with limitation of motion in mostly all ranges of motion.
If too much time passes from the time of the tear’s occurrence to the time of surgical repair, there is a very high
risk of “retraction” where the muscle and tendon shrink away, leaving very little left to work with to reattach and
repair the tendon. Acute rotator cuff injuries may also involve a tear of the biceps muscle, which is a completely
separate part of a shoulder injury. Here again, the muscle needs to be reattached to the humerus bone usually
with the surgeon using metal anchors.
If an original rotator cuff tear is a large “through and through” tear, there is a 40% chance of a re-tear of the
same rotator cuff after a surgical repair. Most re-tears of a previously surgically repaired rotator cuff cannot be
surgically repaired, and the patient has a permanent significant limitation of range of motion of the shoulder
joint, especially with flexion and abduction of over 90 degrees, i.e., the patient cannot raise his or her arm
above chest level.
Patients with either a failed rotator cuff repair or a subsequent re-tear may need a total shoulder replacement (a
24% WPI rating per Table 16-27) by way of a total shoulder arthroplasty, hemi-arthroplasty, or a reverse total
arthroplasty. A reverse shoulder arthroplasty is when the “socket” part of the joint is carved into the proximal
end of the humerus and the “ball” is anchored to the acromium. There is also a relatively new procedure called
a “graft jacket” in which a partial allograft is used to replace the rotator cuff. Beginning around 2009, we have
seen examples of each of these cases with these shoulder conditions and complications.
The third type of impingement injury involves the supraspinatus of the rotator cuff and the acromion. If the
impingement is here, a sub-acromial decompression surgery is performed. This is also called an
“acromioplasty” in which part of the bone underneath the acromion is removed. Do not get confused with this
type of injury and surgery—this does not involve the AC joint, does not result in a Mumford procedure and there
is no distal clavicle resection arthroplasty if the only impingement problem is between the rotator cuff and the
acromion.
A rare form of shoulder injury we see in our cases is the “SLAP” lesion. This is called a “Superior Labrum,
Anterior to Posterior” lesion. The labrum is the lining of a joint. Here there is a tear from the top of the joint from
the front to the back. A SLAP lesion is usually a result of an acute injury—the injured worker falls on his or her
shoulder, breaks a fall with an outstretched arm, suddenly lifts something heavy or has repetitive overhead
work activities. Symptoms of a SLAP lesion include clicking, catching and popping, such as with an
impingement syndrome, and “deep shoulder” pain with 180 degrees of flexion and abduction. The most
accurate diagnosis for a SLAP lesion is from an MRI arthrogram, where a dye is injected into the joint and an
MRI image is taken of the joint.
Page 3 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
The important point to be aware of for injured workers who have shoulder surgery for any of these conditions is
that the surgery itself is no big deal. It is the post surgical physical therapy that is the most painful and difficult to
go through. Ask anyone who has had any kind of shoulder surgery—the term “no pain, no gain” comes from the
physical therapy required after shoulder surgery to regain ranges of motion. One of the risks of physical therapy
after shoulder surgery is to tear the biceps muscle or tendon or both. We have seen a number of cases where
the original injury was to the shoulder joint (glenohumeral) and during physical therapy, the injured worker
suffers a torn biceps that requires more surgical repair.
Another complication from shoulder injuries is a condition called “adhesive capsulitis,” which can result in a
frozen shoulder (the humerus is “frozen” to the scapula or shoulder blade). Unfortunately, the epidemiology of
adhesive capsulitis is that 70% of the patients who get it are women and 20% of diabetics will get it after
shoulder surgery. In fact, any diabetic who has a shoulder injury is at high risk of needing repeat shoulder
surgeries due to re-tears of tendons and the development of scar tissue that causes the adhesive capsulitis, all
caused by the diabetes.
The most common complaint from anyone who has had a rotator cuff repair is weakness of the entire arm and
loss of motion for adduction and external rotation. In fact, the most common complaint from any kind of
shoulder surgery is weakness—the injured worker simply loses the strength in the arm that existed prior to the
shoulder injury. Sometimes the strength returns over time, and sometimes it never returns to pre-injury levels.
There will always be difficulty lifting objects away from the body after any shoulder surgery.
The WPI ratings in the AMA Guides 5th Edition for shoulder conditions are woefully inadequate. Shoulder
dislocations are included but we rarely see cases involving shoulder dislocations or separations. Many people
who have shoulder problems discussed in this section have significant signs, symptoms and complaints after
recovery from surgery that affect the person’s abilities to perform ADLs and work activities, especially those
activities that involve over head or over shoulder duties or lifting objects away from the body. The ratings in
Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides do not adequately describe either impairment of function from a shoulder injury
nor any diagnosis related impairments we commonly see in our cases such as the conditions described in this
section of the guidebook. There are no specific ratings in the AMA Guides 5th Edition for rotator cuff injuries,
SLAP lesions, labrum tears or sub-acromial decompressions.
As a result of this, many physicians are utilizing any alternative rating method they can think of, including using
Table 16-18 on page 499, which is the maximum upper extremity and WPI impairment ratings for each upper
extremity joint, including the three for the shoulder joint—glenohumeral, acromioclavicular, and sternocalvicular.
Physicians provide an estimate of the percentage loss of function of the joint based on the maximum value of
the joint from Table 16-18. In order to use Table 16-18 in this manner, there must be permanent objective
medical evidence of an industrially caused impairment to the joint in question, and the physician must explain
how and why he or she has assigned a WPI rating in this manner and why this method is the most accurate
[see also Ch. 3, § 3.16[4][b] and Ch. 4, § 4.14 of this guidebook].
Occasionally, you will see a shoulder dislocation case that has its own issues for rating permanent impairment.
The first question is: Does a permanent disability rating for a dislocated shoulder occur based on the “diagnosis
based estimate” method prior to treatment, anatomic and functional loss method at MMI, or both? Because of
the seriousness of a shoulder dislocation and the consequences of one episode, a strict WPI rating should
include elements of both. Once a shoulder has dislocated, the younger the patient at the time of dislocation, the
more likely a recurrent dislocation can occur.
When a shoulder joint dislocates, the impact on the shoulder joint is immediate and devastating to the
structures that comprise the entire joint. Recently, in a case handled by this author, a 30-year-old drone aircraft
mechanic was stepping from inside an aircraft shipping container to the ground when his left shoulder
dislocated. The treating physician in his deposition described the injury as a golfing analogy:
“The MRI scan revealed findings that are consistent with an anterior dislocation meaning that the ball of his
shoulder sits in a socket like a golf ball on a golf tee where he had chipped off the front of the wooden part
of the golf tee. That would be called the glenoid deformity or the Bankart lesion.”
“As the head goes out, it recoils from the muscles that are still attached, and it pulls back, and the back of
the head hits the golf tee, and the back head has a lesion called the Hill-Sachs deformity. There’s an
impression fracture to the back of the humeral head, so the socket, the glenoid, has an anterior bony injury
Page 4 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
called the Bankart, and the posterior humeral head has a fracture deformity called the Hill-Sachs deformity,
and those are consistent with a shoulder anterior dislocation.”
At the time of surgery, once the patient was placed under general anesthesia, the physician moves the injured
shoulder to see how unstable it is. In this case, the shoulder was “grossly unstable,” which means that it did not
take much effort for the physician to cause the shoulder to dislocate anteriorly. So the surgical procedures
included fixing the deformity of the humeral head and the glenoid. Bone fragments were removed and the
antero-inferior socket side of the glenoid was cleaned up, anchors were placed and the capsule that was
stripped off was sewn back to the edge of that socket. The physician explained during his deposition that a
Bankart lesion can be just a labrum tear, or it can be a labrum tear with bone pulled off, which was the case
here.
In terms of rating a shoulder dislocation case, the physician must always start with any loss of range of motion
measurements. As stated earlier in this chapter, any shoulder surgery usually results in some loss of motion. In
this case, there were three out of six ranges of motion loss that were ratable using Table 16-3 with Figures 16-
40, 16-43, and 16-46.
For any shoulder dislocation case, you must make sure the treating or evaluating physician uses Table 16-26
on page 505 and goes through each of the parameters of that table to accurately obtain a strict WPI rating. The
rating from Table 16-26 are in addition to any ratings from loss of range of motion and weakness. In the
physician’s deposition testimony, he was asked about each parameter in this case, including the facts that the
patient had an acute trauma, and he has a consistent relationship with symptoms with specific activities and
motion ranges prior to the surgery. He had reproducible symptoms on shoulder stability testing. He had a
gleno-humeral translation class of Class 3, and he demonstrated etiological anatomic lesions with reference to
the Bankart and Hill-Sachs lesions. His upper extremity rating was 5% UE for the loss of motion and 24% UE
for the dislocation under Table 16-26, for a total of 29% UE (you add the separate ratings here because it is the
same joint), which is a 17% WPI overall rating.
For shoulder impairment ratings, physicians are also using loss of range of motion along with motor weakness
utilizing Table 16-35. For an explanation on how to use Table 16-35, see Ch. 3, § 3.16 of this guidebook.
[3] The Knees
The knee is a frequently seen body part involved in industrial injuries—both in acute and cumulative trauma
injury cases. The most common injury we see in our cases is a partially torn meniscus, usually caused by a
twisting injury. We see fractured kneecaps (patella) from direct trauma to the front of the knee, either from a fall
where the person lands directly on the front of the knee, or when the knee is bumped against a blunt object
such as the edge of a desk or a step of a stairway. We also frequently see torn ligaments, such as an anterior
cruciate ligament tear, which causes severe instability of the knee joint and injured workers complain that their
leg “buckles.”
The knee joint is located at the distal end of the femur and the proximal end of the tibia at the tibia plateau.
There are two “forks” at the end of the femur that connect at the top of the tibia plateau called condyles that
form the bony foundation of the knee joint. There is a medial femoral condyle and a lateral femoral condyle. The
medial side of the knee joint that include the medial condyle constitute the “medial compartment” while the
lateral side of the knee joint that includes the lateral condyle constitute the “lateral compartment.” The
“patellofemoral compartment” consists of the area under the knee cap and includes the tracking mechanism for
the knee cap and the articulating cartilage underneath the knee cap.
When we are born, all of the bones in the knee joint have 4mm of articulating interval cartilage. As we age, in
the event of injury and due to lifestyle factors such as overuse, obesity, and other factors, the 4mm of
articulating cartilage eventually wears down, sometimes resulting in the need for a total knee replacement
(TKR). When the 4mm wears down, we become “bone on bone” which causes severe pain and limitation of
function. In most cases, the medial side of the knee wears out first because it carries the most weight bearing
compared to the lateral side. This is why loss of cartilage, even 1mm, is ratable under Table 17-31 in the AMA
Guides 5th Edition. Many panel QME physicians apportion disability to “arthritis” when there is less than 4mm
of cartilage. In fact, 3mm or less of articulating cartilage is ratable under Table 17-31. If both knees on an AP
standing x-ray have equal arthritic changes, then the arthritis is probably non-industrial. However, if one knee
Page 5 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
has significantly more arthritic changes than the other, then the arthritis on the greater side is probably post-
traumatic.
Also, just having knee surgery can cause post traumatic arthritis—caused by surgical invasion of the
articulating surfaces to repair a meniscus or other damage to the knee joint. Unfortunately, the WPI ratings in
Chapter 17, The Lower Extremities, in the AMA Guides do not provide provision of future impairment ratings on
account of a medical condition today that will probably cause impairment in the future.
In addition to having 4mm of articulating cartilage, we also have a medial and lateral meniscus that are half-
moon shaped cartilage that serve as shock absorbers and protect the bone and interval cartilage from damage,
wear and tear. The knee joints have a very low coefficient of friction, which means that the components slide
easily by each other as the joint is used for walking, running, standing, sitting and all other ADL functions.
Orthopedic surgeons who specialize in knees have nicknames for the types of meniscus tears that they
frequently see in practice—including a “bucket handle” tear, “parrot beak” tear, etc. A person who has a partially
torn meniscus usually feels pain, has a swollen knee and there are complaints that the knee “catches” or “pops”
when it is bent. This is usually because a piece of the meniscus is flapping around due to it being torn. Surgery
is a fairly simple procedure where the loose meniscus is debrided and the area is smoothed. As much
remaining meniscus is preserved in order to protect the integrity of the joint and to forestall post traumatic
arthritis from occurring, if possible. The more meniscus that is removed, the sooner osteoarthritis sets in. This is
referred to as “chondral changes.” So a person can develop degenerative joint disease in the knee directly from
an acute trauma such as a torn meniscus and also later as a result of the surgery to repair it, merely from the
passage of time.
Medical literature supports the statistical probability that 10% of partial meniscectomies will result in a re-tear of
the meniscus and a second surgical repair. The AMA Guides do not account for repeat surgical procedures to
the same area of the knee, so an evaluating or treating physician must use his or her clinical judgment to
determine an accurate rating in these rare cases.
Another common injury to the knees we see in our cases is a torn anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and less
often torn posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) or collateral lateral ligament. These ligaments provide stability in
the knee joint—without them, the lower leg would flop around in every direction and we could not walk. The
anatomy of the ACL and PCL in each knee can be described if you cross your fingers (index and middle) and
place them over your knee joint—this roughly shows you where the ligaments are located within the knee—
tying the tibia to the femur and vice versa. Remember, ligaments tie bone to bone while tendons tie muscles to
bone. The reason the term “cruciate” is used is because the ACL and PCL cross over each other from the top
of one bone to the bottom of the other providing lateral stability of the joint.
Injuries to the ACL are very painful with loss of function of the leg, depending on the severity of the torn
ligament. Usually, a torn ACL is caused by direct trauma to the lateral side of the knee that transfers force to
the inside of the knee causing a hyper-extension of the knee. Another cause is if there is a high weight load on
the knee, e.g., while lifting a heavy object, and the injured worker suddenly twists or pivots. A physician can tell
from an MRI scan if an ACL tear exists and can also tell how recent the tear occurred. In most ACL cases,
there is bruising to the femoral condyle along with the torn ACL ligament.
Treatment of an ACL tear depends on the severity of the tear. Years ago, only an open procedure would be
performed, which means that the entire knee would have to be exposed with incisions that were many inches in
length. Today, an ACL repair can be performed without extensive surgical incisions and are minimally invasive.
However, post surgical treatment and rehabilitation takes time and in the most severe cases, a person cannot
perform work other than a desk job for up to a year.
Generally, ACL tears come in three types—mild, moderate, and severe. Mild tears usually heal on their own
without the need for surgery. These are partial tears that are not through and through the ligament or the
ligament is stretched only. In fact, recent research is showing that physical therapy and non-invasive
rehabilitation has as good an outcome as arthroscopic surgery for a mild ACL tear. An alert knee specialist may
read the research that was published in July 2010 and use that finding to convince a claims examiner who does
not authorize more than 24 visits of physical therapy under the limitations of physical medicine in Labor Code
§ 4604.5(d)(1).
Page 6 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
A moderate ACL tear requires surgical repair since the ACL may be completely torn through and through but
can be repaired. Again, post surgical therapy and rehabilitation are essential to a good recovery and outcome
and significant time post-surgically is needed to regain the knee stability lost by the ACL tear injury.
A severely torn ACL must be surgically replaced. For many years an ACL replacement was problematic.
Originally, the standard of care was to remove part of the patella tendon (the longest tendon in the body) and
reconstruct the ACL using the piece of the tendon. This was called a “patellar tendon transfer” and was popular
in the 1980s and 1990s.
The first problem was that the patella tendon was not the same morphology as the ACL since ligament tissue is
rope-like while tendon tissue is more fibrous. As anyone who uses rope knows, little ropes wrapped around
each other to make a larger rope results in a very strong rope. This is essentially what an ACL or PCL looks
like. So a patellar transfer surgery to replace an ACL did not last that long, and it resulted in many failed knee
surgeries or ones with permanent ligament laxity in the affected joint. The second problem was that by taking
part of the patellar tendon to replace the ACL, the surgeon was causing harm to another part of the knee.
Today, the standard of care for replacement of an ACL is to use cadaver tissue, which is a real ACL. Since the
ACL is not loaded with living cells and a blood supply, there is very rare rejection from the recipient’s body of
the cadaver ACL and no immune suppressant medication is necessary like there would be for an organ
transplant. Sometimes the injured worker’s own ACL, what’s left of it, can be used to be reconstructed without
the need for a cadaver ACL. The surgeon will anchor the remnants of the injured worker’s ACL tissue to the
femur and tibia using metal channels, screws and tying off tissue through holes in the bone. Either method of
ACL reconstruction is a serious operation with a very long recovery and rehabilitation.
In all types of ACL tear cases, the injured worker will probably be prescribed a metal framed knee brace to use
before and after surgery to allow for knee stability. Sometimes a brace is prescribed permanently or on a
prophylactic basis.
A fractured patella is simply a fractured knee cap, which is usually caused by direct trauma to the knee cap
from a fall. These fractures are either “displaced” or “non-displaced,” which means that there is ligament
damage along with the fracture and the knee cap is displaced away from the original anatomic axis to which it
belonged. Surgical repair is usually necessary in which the surgeon ties surgical wire to the fractured fragments
of the patella, repairs any torn ligaments and realigns the knee cap to where it belongs. Sometimes, it is
necessary to repair the area underneath the knee cap as well. Most of the time, the injured worker is able to
perform desk-type work with some standing and walking as long as a brace is worn before and after surgery.
Chondromalacia patella (also called patellofemoral pain) is a common industrial injury we see in our cases but it
is a very vexing condition when it comes to finding an accurate WPI rating for it. In fact, this condition is not
listed at all in the AMA Guides, and there is no good explanation for the omission. Usually, chondromalacia
patella occurs on a continuous trauma basis from repetitive heavy work while standing and walking on uneven
terrain. Sometimes, chondromalacia occurs in the absence of injury—just by normal wear and tear.
Chondromalacia patella is a degeneration of the tracking mechanism of the knee cap with degeneration of the
tissue underneath the knee cap and eventual degeneration of the articular cartilage.
There are four grades of chondromalacia: Grade I means that the tissue is frayed; Grade II means that the
articulating cartilage is cracked; Grade III means the bone underneath the cartilage is visible; and Grade IV
means there is degeneration of the bone itself. Grades III and IV require surgical intervention, which ranges
from smoothing out rough, degenerated tissue to a total knee replacement.
Do not confuse chondromalacia patella with post-traumatic crepitation. Post-traumatic crepitation is a ratable
condition under the AMA Guides even in the absence of arthritic changes in the patello-femoral joint. If a person
has had direct trauma to the knee resulting in pain with clicking, cracking or popping when the knee is flexed,
the AMA Guides allow a 2% WPI rating, independent of any other ratable factor of impairment to that knee [see
AMA Guides, Table 17-31, p. 544, daggered footnote; see also Blackledge v. Bank of America, 75 Cal. Comp.
Cases 613 (2010) (Appeals Board en banc decision)].
The knee joint consists of three separate compartments: the medial compartment; the lateral compartment; and
the patello-femoral compartment. If one of the three is degenerated with “bone on bone” then the person is in
need of a total knee replacement (TKR). Recent estimates indicate that by the year 2030, 3.48 million people
Page 7 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
will need a TKR. In 2009, about 580,000 people in the USA had a TKR. We are an aging population, and it is
not just injured workers with bad knees who have to worry.
A physician knows empirically whether a person is a candidate for a TKR just by looking at an AP view x-ray
taken while the injured worker stands up. When there is nothing left of the 4mm of interval cartilage in either the
medial or lateral side of the knee joint, then the person needs a knee replacement. The standard of care in any
setting, regardless of whether the need for a TRK is work related, is to inform the patient that he or she is bone
on bone and then wait until the patient tells the physician that either the pain is too intolerable or weight bearing
functions (such as walking) have been severely compromised.
By the way, a vigilant physician will take AP views of both knees with standing x-rays in order to compare the
right knee to the left knee to see if there is general diffuse osteoarthritis. If one knee stills has interval cartilage
while the other one does not, then that is evidence that the one without is post-traumatic. Natural progressing
arthritic degeneration of joints is usually symmetrical on the contra-lateral side in the absence of injuries.
If an injured worker needs a TKR, chances are it is on the medial side of one knee. This is because the medial
side tends to degenerate first because the inside of the knee bears most of our weight. In fact, the entire knee
joint bears five times the person’s body weight for every step he or she takes due to the physical forces
involved in walking. Some orthopedic surgeons will perform a hemi-knee arthroplasty or a partial knee
replacement, replacing the arthritic side and preserving the non-arthritic side, again usually replacing the medial
side and preserving the lateral side. Even the AMA Guides have a WPI rating for a partial knee replacement
[see AMA Guides, Table 17-33, pages 546–547; see also Ch. 3, § 3.17 of this guidebook in which the correct
use of Table 17-33 is discussed]. Remember, Table 17-33 is the most misunderstood and misapplied Table in
the AMA Guides and requires a rating based on a diagnosis without a physical examination or consideration for
outcome of treatment, except for joint replacements.
A TKR requires significant post-surgical care including physical therapy and rehabilitation. Body mechanics
have to be adjusted, and patients need to learn how to properly move around. Components in a TKR last about
15 years, which is better than 20 years ago when the components lasted between eight and 12 years. The
generally accepted age at which to replace a knee joint is when a person is in his or her 60s. This is because if
a person is very young and has a TKR, a subsequent replacement TKR is a difficult surgery fraught with
complications. The AMA Guides do not have any rubric for determining a WPI rating for people who have
repeat TKR surgeries on the same knee due to prior failed components or scar tissue formation.
A technical problem in every TKR is for the surgeon to correctly orient the patient’s operative leg with respect to
his or her other leg. All of us are not aligned perfectly, one leg may be in slight varus (the knees are farther
apart) and another leg may be in slight valgus (the knees are closer together—“knock-kneed”). The challenge is
to align the legs as closely as the patient’s natural leg positions were prior to surgery and while the patient is
under anesthesia.
TKR surgery has its unique risks that are greater than just being under general anesthesia. There is a risk of
one leg being shorter than the other as a result of a TKR. Another risk is for the knee to be limited in its range of
motion due to scar tissue formation. There is a risk of loosening of the TKR components; there are cases where
a plastic alignment ring had to be surgically replaced. Though rare, there are sometimes cases where there is a
problem with biocompatibility of the components. And finally, the biggest risk of all is infection in the surgical
site and, unfortunately, these have occurred in work related injury cases that result in a TKR. Most infections
have involved staphylococcus aureus, which requires inter-venous antibiotic therapy and even more drastic
treatment measures, up to and including amputation of the leg.
Another unintended consequence of a TKR is that people who tended to exercise prior to a TKR do not do so
afterwards. A recent study showed that while 94% of patients participated in sports at some point prior to a
TKR, only 34% of them exercised afterwards. What does this mean to a workers’ compensation claim? Claims
administrators may be liable for payment for weight reduction programs in these patients.
For younger patients (under 40 years of age) whose inter-articular cartilage is compromised significantly,
physicians will routinely order viscosupplementation with hyaluronic acid, which is a natural component of a
joint. The physician does a series of injections of hyaluronic acid (we see it in medical records called “Synvisc”®
or “Hyaline”®) taking up to five weeks to work but which research shows provides benefit for up to 13 weeks for
each injection in terms of reduced pain and increased function. This substance provides some patients with
Page 8 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
lubrication of the diseased joint and shock absorption but it does not cause re-generation of the cartilage. This
treatment is only a stop-gap measure to stall and delay a TKR.
One standard of care that is getting less favor and may become a utilization review problem in our cases is
injections of cortisone into the affected knee joint. Past experience has shown that a cortisone injection reduces
knee swelling and thereby reduces pain brought on by bone on bone arthritis. Research published in 2009,
however, indicates that corticosteroid injections combined with lidocaine to numb the injection site can be toxic
to any cartilage that is left. In early osteoarthritis, the best treatment is exercise, some physical therapy and oral
anti-inflammatories.
Be careful with cases where the injured worker not only has a meniscus tear but also has osteoarthritis in the
same area of the knee. This is not just one pathology involved—there are two separate things going on here.
Research has shown that less than half of the patients who had a partial meniscectomy and who have
osteoarthritis on the same side had less pain in the knee two years post surgery. Fifteen percent of these
patients needed a TKR within a year of the meniscus surgery!
In some post-traumatic knee injury cases involving younger individuals where there is a partial loss of cartilage,
restoration of some cartilage is still possible. There is a “microfracture” technique in which the surgeon drills
holes into the bone and scar tissue forms and combines with already existing cartilage thereby filling in a
defect. In other patients, sometimes a chunk of healthy cartilage can be removed and grown in a laboratory and
re-implanted into the defect. These are relatively new techniques that are gaining acceptance in the general
medical community and from which we can seek assistance for younger injured workers who are too young for
a TKR.
A difficult case involves industrial injuries to a knee where the medial and lateral sides are fine, but the patello-
femoral joint is degenerated. In these cases, a TKR is problematic. A TKR of the patello-femoral compartment
has the most complications and has poor outcomes compared to a medial or lateral osteoarthritic compartment.
There are a few joint replacement specialists in California who are competent to perform this type of surgery
successfully. This is because the components are not really designed to replace the knee cap, underneath the
knee cap and the tracking mechanism for it. However, a TKR in this situation is reasonable to reduce pain and
to improve weight bearing function in these people.
In any knee injury case that involves surgery, whether a TKR or not, post surgical physical therapy is a must.
Like the shoulder, restoring range of motion is the key to a successful surgical outcome. The development of
scar tissue and adhesions are a real risk in healthy individuals, and the risk of a “frozen” knee is as real as the
risk of a frozen shoulder. This is why claims examiners are given statutory discretion to authorize more than 24
physical therapy visits. Post surgical guidelines also mandate liberal numbers of physical therapy sessions in
order to restore range of motion and reduce swelling as a result of a knee surgery. In diabetic patients, there is
a greater risk of adhesions in any joint surgery, even in a TKR. Therefore, aggressive post replacement
physical therapy is a must for diabetic patients who have TKR surgery.
In all cases, however, physicians need to be reminded that they have to justify in writing why physical therapy is
needed when a request for authorization is submitted. In that realm, evidence that physical therapy has
provided improvement in range of motion or weight bearing functional restoration is now a necessity in order to
obtain that authorization. It boils down to economics—pay now or pay later—if post-surgical physical therapy is
delayed or denied and the community standards of care call for more physical therapy sessions, increased WPI
ratings will occur all to the potential long-term physical detriment of the injured worker.
There have been cases in which a repeat TKR has to occur due to infection or failure of the replacement
components of the artificial knee. In fact, we have seen cases where the injured worker has to endure two,
three, and even four knee replacements of the same knee due to complications from an original TKR surgery.
Any repeat TKR is problematic when it comes to rating the case under the AMA Guides. This is because the
Guides require ratings based on a “good,” “fair,” or “poor” result of the TKR based on criteria listed in Table 17-
35. The criteria in that Table do not really fit for repeat TKR cases, so a physician would have to find an
alternative rating method to most accurately determine the WPI rating in these unfortunate cases. In one case
handled by this author, the AME determined that the WPI rating should be a 60% WPI based on the routine use
of a wheelchair since the applicant needed to use one whenever she left her home. See AMA Guides Table 17-
Page 9 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
5, which lists “wheelchair dependent” as an 80% WPI; here, the injured worker used one “routinely,” but not
while she is at home.
What is the role, if any, of obesity on knee function? Remember, obesity is a risk factor for certain medical
conditions including diabetes, hypertension, heart disease and other conditions. What is interesting is that the
role of obesity in many medical conditions is controversial because the medical literature is in conflict. What can
be said about obesity and osteoarthritis is that obesity does cause degenerative arthritis in the knee joints, but it
is not a factor in degenerative arthritis of the hip joints. This is because of the different biomechanics of weight
bearing that the knee joint handles compared to the hip joint, which derives a great deal of assistance from the
pelvis and spine. The knees do not have that luxury. Can obesity cause arthritis in the knee joints? The
literature is very clear and there is medical consensus that obesity can cause, aggravate, and accelerate
osteoarthritis in the knee joints. But there is no evidence that obesity can cause or aggravate lumbar spinal
arthritic conditions.
While on the subject of lower extremities—there is an interesting anomaly involving osteoarthritis of the elbow
and hip joints—you can never justify a cumulative trauma injury to these parts of body. Any osteoarthritis that
occurs in the hip and elbow are from the aging process or post-traumatic. The general literature does not
support the existence of a “repetitive motion injury” to the hip or elbow joints. The only cumulative trauma injury
recognized by current medical consensus is involvement of nerve entrapment at the elbow but not degeneration
of the bones that are the foundation of the elbow joint. Same thing applies to the hips—again, because of the
biomechanics of how the hip joint works.
On the subject of atrophy of the lower extremity due to an injury, Table 17-6 of the AMA Guides allow for a WPI
rating for any atrophy in the calf or thigh of 1 cm or greater. However, the consensus of most AME quality
physicians is that any measurable atrophy of a lower extremity is medically significant and should be ratable.
This is because there is no such thing as leg dominance in most people. In other words, there is no such thing
as “left-leggedness” or “right-leggedness.” So even a 1/2 cm atrophy should be medically significant if that
atrophy is permanent, the measurement is accurate and can be explained by an injury to the involved lower
extremity.
For reasons not explained by the authors of the AMA Guides, there are no WPI impairment table or ratings
assigned for upper extremity atrophy in Chapter 16 of the Guides. For upper extremities, the consensus among
AME quality physicians is that there should be a 10% variance between arm circumferences of the dominant
and non-dominant arms, along with a 10% variance of grip strength between dominant and non-dominant
hands, the latter of which is described in Tables 16-30 through 16-34 of the AMA Guides.
[4] The Spine
Low back injuries are probably the most frequent industrial injury cases we see and litigate the most.
Depositions about causation, apportionment and treatment occur every day for legal counsel and physicians
alike. This section, like the others in this chapter, will cover some common medical issues we face in our cases
and for which some knowledge of medicine will help you prepare your cases for discovery and trial. We start
with asking, which of the following spinal conditions are ratable impairment of function under the AMA Guides?
• HERNIATED INTERVERTEBRAL DISC WITH NERVE ROOT IMPINGEMENT
• SPONDYLOSIS
• SPONDYLOLYSIS
• SPINAL CANAL STENOSIS
• NEURAL FORAMINA STENOSIS
• SPONDYLOLISTHESIS
• FRACTURES
• ZYGOAPOPHYSEAL PAIN (FACET JOINT SYNDROME)
• DISC BULGES WITH NERVE ROOT IRRITATION
Page 10 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
• DEGENERATIVE DISC DISEASE
• ANNULAR TEARS
The answer is all of them. The next question is if an injured worker suffers from more than one of these
conditions at the same time in the same spinal sub-region, which one is causing signs, symptoms and
complaints? The answer is we don’t know. In clinical medical practice, 93% of the time the physician cannot tell
which condition is causing the patient’s symptoms and limitation of function. What does this mean to us? The
answer is that physicians must give their best opinions about where a pain generator is coming from and
provide standard of care treatment for it.
Every practicing physician will tell you that physical pain is the single most important cause of functional
impairment, second only to loss of a body part. When a person hurts, they avoid activities. So what are we
dealing with in these cases?
[5] Herniated Intervertebral Disc With Nerve Root Impingement
You see this diagnosis in medical records as “HNP,” and injured workers are told they have a “herniated disc”
or “ruptured disc” or “pinched nerve.” There are generally three kinds of disc conditions we see—roughly
classified as a “bulging” or “protruding” disc, herniated disc or extruded disc. We also see “disc desiccation” and
“degenerative disc disease” or “DDD.”
Do not assume everyone understands what a “disc” is. An intervertebral disc is a flat, circular capsule about
one inch in diameter by one-quarter inch thick while we are young. There is an outer fibrous membrane called
the annulus fibrosis and inside is an elastic core called the nucleus pulposus. The discs are held in place by
ligaments and the vertebral bodies. By early adulthood, any blood flow to the disc has stopped, the soft nucleus
pulposus hardens and the disc is less elastic. By middle adulthood, the discs are tough, hardened and like a
piece of hard rubber. The outer lining also becomes brittle and more prone to crack or tear.
Virtually everyone who is age 40 or older will develop bulging discs. Most people over age 40 years have 2–3
mm disc bulges that do not cause symptoms. It is the product of the aging process. So is disc desiccation.
When you look at MRI or X-ray films of the spine, if a nice light colored disc is visible between two bony
vertebral bodies, that disc is a normal, happy disc. If the disc is dark or black and thin compared to others, it is
desiccated—which means it lost its water content. It went from a “plum” to a “prune” or from a “grape” to a
“raisin.” This condition results from the aging process as well but may also occur post injury to the disc.
Remember, the purpose of discs in the spine is to serve as shock absorbers. Check your height when you were
17 years old and then check your height when you turn 53 years, and you will see that, even in the absence of
spinal injuries, you may have shrunk 1.50 inches just from disc desiccation.
In fact, when you read an MRI or x-ray report that says there is “complete loss of disc height,” it means that the
person has advanced degenerative disc disease. It probably is not work related by itself but symptoms can
occur because of an industrial injury. In fact, long term employment in heavy work activities can cause the
degeneration process to occur where discs otherwise would not have degenerated as and when they did. Total
degeneration of discs takes years to develop, and sometimes the vertebral bodies will naturally fuse together
without fusion surgery.
An “annular tear” refers to the outer, fibrous covering of the nucleus pulposus. Sometimes an injury will cause
the annulus to tear that causes signs, symptoms and complaints of back pain. As stated above, generally
people under 40 years of age still have nerves in the annulus and if there is a torn annulus, severe symptoms
may occur. A herniated nucleus pulposus by definition results in a torn annulus first and then disc material that
seeps out through the tear.
What interests us in our cases is when a disc bulge impinges on a nerve root. Hypothetically, a person can
have a 2mm disc bulge that impinges on a nerve root causing significant pain, signs and symptoms while
someone else can have a 10mm disc herniation without nerve root impingement and with no symptoms at all,
so everything is relative. In fact, at autopsy, many herniated discs are seen where the person had excellent
medical insurance coverage, saw physicians regularly but never complained about pain that came from the
spine.
Page 11 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
On the other hand, a disc herniation, protrusion or extrusion is more likely to impinge on a nerve root. When
that occurs, the patient feels severe pain, has muscle spasms, rigidity and sometimes radiating symptoms.
Most lay people refer to this as “sciatica” but that term can be misleading because the nerve impingement may
not involve the sciatic nerve at all. In clinical practice, any numbness, pain or symptom that travels down a leg
or arm from a spinal injury is considered to be a “radiculopathy.” We have 31 pairs of nerve roots in our spine.
It does not matter whether a radiculopathy follows a dermatomal (nerve root) distribution. However, the rigid
instructions in the AMA Guides require a more precise definition of the source, signs and symptoms in order to
justify the diagnosis of a true radiculopathy. When in doubt, use Figures 15-1 and 15-2 on page 377 in Chapter
15 of the AMA Guides to determine whether a radiculopathy truly exists. On the other hand, the AMA Guides
also state that EMG/NCV testing does not detect all radiculopathies (see pages 382–383 under
“Electrodiagnostic Verification of Radiculopathy” in Box 15-1). This is why physicians are allowed to use their
best clinical judgment and explains why some physicians will call something a “verified radiculopathy” while
others will not.
Lower extremity radiculopathy can be caused by damage to nerve roots at a level above where the symptoms
originate. For example, leg pain along the L-3 distribution (a femoral nerve distribution; see Figure 9-8 above)
could be caused by the disruption of the spine above it. So, again, for example, a herniated disc at L4–L5 will
cause symptoms along the sciatic nerve distribution, even in the absence of an L-3 lesion. This is why nerve
conduction studies are important if the physician suspects multi-level lumbar spine pathology. A patient’s
symptom presentation, MRI imaging, along with electro-diagnostic studies, are the standard of care to
determine what levels of pathology exist and what levels, if any, are causing a radiculopathy.
We are also seeing a significant number of cases that involve what is called “early onset spinal disease” in
which the sudden onset of low back pain with radiculopathy, as a result of degenerative disc disease,
spondylosis, or frank disc herniation without a significant traumatic injury, occurring in people who are under 40
years of age. This author has handled two cases alone where the injured worker is in his or her early twenties
and about five cases where the injured worker is in his or her mid-thirties when the first of many back surgeries
occur—most of which were not through the workers’ compensation system to begin with so aggressive
treatment was not an issue in these cases. What is tragic about these unfortunate patients is that by the time
they reach their late forties or early fifties, they have had multiple spinal surgeries and their spines look like the
person is in their eighties. There is no known genetic link to the early disease process in these patients, nor is
there enough research to identify why spinal disease exists in some young people in this manner.
The subject of a patient’s body habitus comes up concerning apportionment of lumbar spinal impairment due to
obesity. The research is in dispute and controversial about the role of obesity on spinal disorders, but the
current consensus is that there is no link between obesity and eventual spinal surgery. The research is in
conflict about the existence of any link between lumbar spinal signs, symptoms, and complaints associated with
obesity, but common sense dictates that the less weight the axial spine takes on a day-to-day basis, the better
for the patient who has low back pain. In contrast, as stated in § 8.06[3], above, the medical literature does
support a link between obesity and knee arthritis.
There is a test that many physicians will perform called a “foraminal compression test” in which the injured
worker is told to turn his or her head to the right or left and to extend the neck so that he or she is looking down.
Then the physician exerts pressure on the head pressing down, compressing the cervical vertebrae. If this
causes an increase in radicular symptoms from the neck to the shoulder and upper extremity then the test is
considered positive for neural foraminal stenosis from a herniated disc or other source of narrowing. If an MRI
study already showed narrowing in the neural foramina at different levels, then most physicians will not need to
perform the foraminal compression test. In fact, some physicians feel that this test should not be performed on
a patient who is suspected to have a herniated disc in the cervical spine.
In rare cases we see what is called a “fragmented extruded disc,” which means that a piece of disc material has
broken off and is floating around in the spinal canal. This is a neurologic emergency and immediate spinal
surgery is necessary if there is a progressive or significant neurological compromise.
With any kind of spinal disc surgery, nerve roots are “decompressed” by surgical removal of disc material that is
causing nerve root impingement. The impinged nerve is usually inflamed from being “pinched” by the herniated
or extruded disc and may continue to cause radicular pain and symptoms even after the decompression
Page 12 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
surgery for awhile. The area that is decompressed eventually fills in with scar tissue, and the spinal surgeon
holds his or her breath that the scar tissue does not impinge on a nerve root. As in all surgeries, scar tissue
formation is a known risk of spinal surgery, and in some of our cases it occurs, causing a failed lumbar
syndrome.
The cervical spine consists of seven vertebral bodies and seven disc spaces. The thoracic spine has twelve
vertebral bodies and twelve disc spaces. The lumbar spine consists of five vertebral bodies separated by five
disc spaces, and the sacrum has two vertebral bodies with very narrow, if any, disc spaces. There is another
physical phenomenon that we see in our cases from time to time and that involves what is called “sacralization”
of the lumbar spine or a “transitional vertebrae.” This means that a person has an extra vertebral body and disc
that lies between L5 and S1. It is usually referred to as L6 or a “sacralization of L5.”
People who have a transitional vertebrae or sacralization of the lumbar spine are at higher risk of developing
lumbar spinal signs, symptoms and complaints due to jobs that require twisting of the torso on a repetitive
basis, such as grocery store cashiers, assembly line workers and warehouse personnel. Even a person with a
desk job who swivels while sitting is at higher risk of developing low back problems due to the extra disc and
vertebrae.
[6] Spinal Canal and Neural Foraminal Stenosis
The average normal spinal canal in the lumbar area is about 11 mm in diameter. The cervical spinal canal is
about 9 mm in diameter. The spinal cord is a cord of nerves from the base of the brain until it reaches about L1
where the cord branches out and becomes a series of filaments, looking like a horse’s tail, which is why it is
called the cauda equina, which means “horse’s tail.” Holes in the vertebral bodies through which nerves run to
the upper and lower extremities are called “neural foramina.”
The term stenosis means “narrowing.” So if an artery has stenosis, it is narrowed by plaque. If a spinal canal in
the neck or lumbar area has stenosis, then the canal is narrowed by bone, disc material or calcium deposits
that should not be there. If the neural foramina is narrowed, it, too, is deemed to have stenosis. A truly pinched
nerve is one that is entrapped by neural foramina stenosis. When you see MRI reports that say the neural
foramina is “patent,” this means that the hole through which nerve roots travel to an upper or lower extremity is
open and is not stenotic. You can see spinal stenosis while looking at MRI films when the spinal canal looks like
an hour glass. Stenosis can be caused by a herniated disc where the disc material intrudes the spinal canal.
Why is stenosis so painful? You only have so much room within the spinal canal and neural foramina for
movement of the spinal components. If a person loses diameter of the spinal canal or neural foramina, the
neural components become irritated from every day movements causing symptoms. Irritated nerves get
inflamed and the inflammation also reduces the diameter of the canal or foramina.
This is why in all cases involving irritated nerve roots, regardless of the reason, the standard of care is to do a
series of epidural steroid injections (ESI) which are intended to reduce the swelling of the nerves and
surrounding structures and to provide at least temporary relief of the symptoms caused by the nerve
impingement. The standard of care is to try ESI first and if they do not work and the diagnostic imaging and
nerve testing is appropriately positive, then decompression surgery may be reasonable and necessary. This
standard of care exists throughout the world and is not limited to workers’ compensation cases in the State of
California. Usually, during the first two days after an ESI, there is no improvement in symptoms. If an ESI is
going to work, symptoms will be reduced between 3 and 10 days after the actual injection. Symptom
improvements have been known to last weeks, months and sometimes years, thereby delaying any need for
invasive spinal surgery.
One cautionary statement about epidural steroid injections should be noted here and applies in any ESI for the
lumbar or cervical spine. Even though the standard of care in cases that involve suspected nerve root irritation
is to perform a series of ESI procedures, injections of steroids increase the risk of diabetes, both in terms of
causing it and in terms of aggravating the serum blood sugar levels of a person who already is diabetic. Do not
be surprised if in some cases, proper treatment of a non-industrial diabetic condition must be accomplished
before any meaningful somewhat invasive treatment for a spinal condition can occur. See Ch. 3, § 3.10 of this
guidebook for a thorough discussion about diabetes.
Page 13 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
The standard of care to treat stenosis is to eliminate the cause of the narrowing. This usually means that if ESI
procedures do not work, then the only remedy is to perform a surgical procedure that opens up the neural
foramina (called a “foraminotomy,” which some physicians call a “roto-rooter” job). If there is significant spinal
canal stenosis, a physician will recommend a disc replacement or spinal fusion, removing invading disc or bone
spur material and replacing it with bone between vertebral bodies, which completely removes the stenosis. That
being said, in many patients, physical therapy to include spinal stabilization, weight loss, abdominal
strengthening and keeping a neutral spine with learning proper body mechanics can sometimes help them
avoid spinal surgery.
On the subject of disc replacement surgery, current research favors doing only one level within the same sub-
region of the spine. Not enough outcomes research is available on multiple level disc replacement surgeries to
justify general use of the procedure. Also, some orthopedic surgeons have fallen out of favor with lumbar disc
replacement surgeries altogether because of the lack of long term outcomes research and because of the
enormous weight load the lumbar spine carries on an artificial disc compared to the 18 pounds of weight a
cervical spine disc replacement carries.
So far, cervical disc replacement surgery is being favored for patients since outcomes research is more
favorable than for lumbar spinal disc replacement. Disc replacement surgery is still preferred for younger
individuals since fusion surgery causes up to 3% adjacent level disc degeneration per year post fusion surgery.
So far, there is no evidence that disc replacement surgery causes the adjacent segmental degeneration that
fusion surgery does.
Disc replacement surgery was approved in Europe prior to its approval by the FDA in the United States in
August 2005. There were only about 10 years of long-term efficacy research from the European patients at the
time the procedure was approved by the FDA here in the United States. The disc replacement components are
different from those used in Europe, and the long term efficacy of them used here in the United States is not
completely known. Suffice it to say that the jury is still out on how long disc replacements last and whether they
will still be favored in our cases. The difficulty is when a workers’ compensation judge must decide between a
fusion and disc replacement surgery when a treating physician requests authorization for the replacement while
a second opinion spinal surgery evaluation under Labor Code § 4062(b) recommends a spinal fusion and not a
disc replacement. WCAB panel decisions on this issue have been equally divided in approving or disapproving
disc replacement surgeries.
Another problem with disc replacement surgery involves the research that led to FDA approval of the procedure
in the United States in August 2005. The participants in the research never had lumbar disc surgery prior to the
disc replacement surgery. This is important because early findings are showing that patients who did have a
prior decompression surgery (e.g., a laminectomy with decompression of a nerve root) do not have a good
outcome with a subsequent disc replacement surgery at the same level. This is because in order to perform the
prior decompression surgery, the surgeon had to remove bone to get to the diseased disc and neural structures
in order to perform the decompression of the nerve from the herniated disc. By removing some of the
surrounding bony structures, the prior surgery reduces the physical integrity of the entire vertebrae, and the
stress of a disc replacement on the compromised bony structure may cause a failure of the replacement.
When there is ultimately a fusion, either in the cervical or lumbar spine, there is always a cost-benefit analysis
that must be discussed between the injured worker and his or her treating or evaluating physician. The medical
literature for years has supported the concept of “adjacent segmental degeneration.” What this refers to is that
when there is a spinal fusion, over time, the fused area will put additional and significant stress on the
intervertebral levels adjacent to and above and below the fusion.
The literature supports that, in most cases, there is a 3% degeneration of the levels above and below a fusion
each year. So if an injured worker has a fusion at L3–L4 at age 40, by age 60, the literature indicates the
person will probably have at least 60% degeneration at L2–L3 and at L4–L5. The only treatment for this, if the
adjacent levels are degenerated, is to extend the fusion into those levels. Patients are in bigger trouble at
adjacent levels to a fusion 20 years later if, at the time of the fusion surgery, there was already some
degeneration at those levels. This is why disc replacement surgery was so attractive at first—disc replacement
could delay spinal fusion surgery in younger individuals for at least 5-10 years.
Page 14 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
There is also a fairly common complication of cervical spinal surgery, especially when there are plates and
screws installed to stabilize at least two levels of the spine—dysphagia—or trouble swallowing. In almost all
cervical spine fusion surgeries, the surgeon enters the cervical spine from an anterior approach, which
necessitates physically moving the esophagus and trachea aside in order to approach the surgical site. Upon
installing the fusion and stabilizing the spine with a plate and screws, sometimes the tissue surrounding the
plate becomes swollen and causes difficulty for the patient to swallow. When this happens, sometimes the
surgeon has to remove the plate once the fusion has taken and internal fixation devices are no longer needed.
Other times, the plate must remain in place and the patient has to learn how to live with the difficulty with
hoarseness in his or her voice and with swallowing.
In any fusion case involving the cervical or lumbar spine, you always have to worry about a “pseudoarthrosis,”
which means that the fusion did not take and the bones that were supposed to fuse together did not.
Sometimes this happens when a patient’s body rejects the fusion material, such as when it is taken from a
cadaver. Other times, a pseudoarthrosis occurs when the patient is a smoker and the bones do not properly
and completely fuse. If you represent an injured worker who smokes cigarettes and who needs a cervical or
lumbar fusion, the best advice you can give him or her is to stop smoking for at least two months prior to a
fusion surgery and to quit altogether thereafter. Sometimes, non-legal advice is worth more than legal advice
from a lawyer to his or her client. When a pseudoarthrosis occurs, usually the fusion needs to be surgically re-
explored and a repeat fusion is necessary.
[7] Spondylolisthesis
This condition refers to when a vertebral body slips or moves over an adjacent one. There are four grades—
Grade 1 refers to up to a 25% slippage, Grade 2 refers to a 25–50% slippage, Grade 3 refers to a 50–75%
slippage and Grade 4 refers to a 75–100% slippage. The percentages above refer to the percentage of the
diameter of the vertebral body that slips over the adjacent vertebral body.
Most people who have a Grade 1 spondylolisthesis are born with it or develop it in childhood without symptoms!
Most people who are born with the slight slippage (anterolisthesis means forward, retrolisthesis means
backward) do not have symptoms in their entire lifetime in the absence of injury. For those people who do
develop symptoms, they usually do so upon an acute injury, such as a sudden heavy lifting incident (in our
cases, occurring while at work). A pre-existing mild spondylolisthesis can be aggravated by continuous trauma
work activities from repetitive bending, stooping, twisting and turning, and lifting. Flexion and extension x-rays
or MRI imaging confirms the diagnosis and allow a physician to measure the percentage of vertebral body
diameter that is involved. You can actually see the different positions of the vertebral bodies with respect to
each other when you compare the flexion x-ray to the extension x-ray films.
Sometimes a physician will refer to the symptoms caused by spondylolisthesis as “mechanical back pain” or
“spinal instability,” which means the structure of the spine causes the injured worker’s signs, symptoms and
complaints. Usually the injured worker bitterly complains of pain with any kind of bending backwards, forwards
and sideways. In many cases involving spondylolisthesis, the disc between the slipping vertebrae also gets
herniated, causing nerve root irritation with radicular pain in addition to that caused directly by the slippage.
The standard of care in treating spondylolisthesis that does not respond to conservative care is to perform a
spinal fusion with internal fixation that stabilizes the spine and prevents slippage. There is very little else, if
anything, that can be done to prevent the continuation of severe and incapacitating pain and limitation of
activities for anyone who has symptoms from this condition if the symptoms progressively worsen. Many people
have a mild strain injury and are found to have a mild spondylolisthesis—they can be treated with physical
therapy without surgery.
A significant debate on apportionment of impairment that is caused by spondylolisthesis always exist because
in most cases, a Grade I spondylolisthesis exists from birth or childhood. Once an industrial injury “lights up” the
condition, defense counsel will argue that the slight slippage of one vertebral body over another is
apportionable since the condition existed prior to the industrial injury and the pathology is ratable under the
AMA Guides. See Table 15-7 on page 404.
On the other hand, the applicant’s attorney will argue that there is no apportionment to non-industrial factors
because there was no impairment of function, signs, symptoms, or complaints due to a congenital
Page 15 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
spondylolisthesis until after an industrial injury “lights up” the condition and not all pathologies cause impairment
of function. The WCAB has not yet tackled this very difficult medical-legal issue with any en banc decision, and
there is no published appellate decision specifically addressing this issue.
[8] Spondylolysis
This is a condition that means the articulating surfaces of the vertebrae are degenerating. The articulating
surface is where the disc material sets between each vertebral body. The term, “lysis” means loosening. So
spondylolysis is a defect that occurs in the posterior part of the spine known as the pars interarticularis; we see
this in medical reports as a “pars defect.” See, for example, Table 15-7, section III. A., page 404 of the AMA
Guides. However, a diagnosis of spondylolysis does not require actual slippage of one vertebral body over
another.
[9] Spondylosis
Remember, the spine itself is a dynamic body part—it is a set of joints that allows us to bend, turn, sit, stand,
and it holds up our torso and head. Each segment in each sub-region is a joint and has a function, moving in
concert with each adjacent segment. When injury or disease sets in, this harmony is disrupted. Spondylosis is a
term referring to degenerative osteoarthritis of the spine and its joints. Spondylosis is simply another term for
spinal arthritis—where the bony structures degenerate due to arthritic changes including development of bone
spurs, jagged edges, disc herniations, or joint deterioration. Simple plain x-rays are sufficient to diagnose spinal
arthritis but many physicians can reasonably also order MRI imaging if any soft tissue lesions are suspected.
For patients with spondylosis, treatment may include pain and anti-inflammatory medications, exercise, some
physical therapy and maybe ESI procedures.
[10] Fractures
The most common spinal fracture cases we see involve compression fractures although there are rare cases
involving what is called a “burst fracture”, which can result in partial or total paralysis. Most compression
fractures involve less than 25% of the height of the vertebral body. The AMA Guides in Table 15-7, section IA
include specific ratings for compression fractures, depending upon what percentage loss of height exists from a
fracture. This rating is combined with the loss of motion ratings and any sensory or motor impairment ratings.
The important factor to watch out for when you see a lumbar spinal fracture case is to also be aware of any
other structural damage to the disc and nerve roots in the area where a fracture has occurred. We commonly
will see a disc herniation or neural foraminal stenosis as a result of a compression fracture.
Sometimes you will see a different kind of fracture called a “pars defect” or stress fracture of the articulating
joint in the spine (this is also called a spondylolysis, discussed in [8], above). High quality x-ray imaging can
detect a pars defect but computerized tomography (CT scan) is more accurate when there is a visible fracture
line. If there is not a visible fracture line, then MRI studies provide the most accurate evidence of diagnosis due
to bone marrow swelling and impingement on nerve roots.
[11] Zygoapophyseal Pain (Facet Joint Syndrome)
In order to understand what a facet joint is, you have to remember that the purpose of the entire spine, besides
holding up the torso and head, is to enable us to bend forward, backwards and sideways. This function is from
the facet joints at each level of our spine. At the back of each vertebrae is a hinge-like joint. The points on
which the vertebrae actually turn are the facet joints, which stick out like arched wings on the back of each
vertebrae. The term “zygo-” means “winged.” The facet joint prevents the bony parts of a vertebrae from
twisting or turning and thereby damaging the spinal cord.
People who have facet joint syndrome have signs, symptoms and complaints with bending forward, backward
and sideways with pain and limitations of motion. In addition, lifting causes symptoms to increase because
lifting puts pressure on the discs. If one disc goes bad, the next one can get bad because they are all tied
together. It is like if you have a fracture that is right above the knee joint, your knee joint can become arthritic
Page 16 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
even though the knee joint was not involved. It is the same thing with facet joints—if one goes bad due to injury,
the others will probably follow.
The term “facet joint hypertrophy” means that the facet joints are enlarged. This originally was thought to be
pathology but recent consensus is that it is part of the aging process and does not mean that a person with it is
at risk of having facet joint syndrome or for that matter, any other lumbar spinal problem.
For injured workers who have symptomatic facet joint syndrome, a series of epidural steroid injections are first
attempted to reduce the nerve root irritation if there is nerve root compromise. For purely facet problems, either
facet injections or medial branch blocks are performed. If that procedure works, then a series of three injections
can be given every year as a standard of care and anti-inflammatory medications as adjunct therapy. If the
injections work but there is not long term relief, we sometimes see a request for authorization for a “zygo-
apophyseal ablation procedure” also known as a “rhizotomy.” Here, the nerve root endings are “cut” by
electrical ablation techniques that cause the pain to be reduced or eliminated. These are performed every 12 to
15 months because the nerve endings regenerate during that time period. The problem with this procedure is
that (1) its effects are temporary, and (2) the injured worker needs to be under a light general anesthesia for the
procedure to be performed, creating additional risks. Most AME quality physicians will not suggest repeat
rhizotomies unless there is a greater than 50% improvement in symptoms after the initial one.
[12] X-rays, MRI and CAT Scans
What are the differences, if any, in the sensitivity of an X-ray, an MRI scan and a CT scan for imaging of spinal
structures? The differences are important because there are reasons for using one over the other in certain
circumstances. X-rays are only good in spinal cases to determine gross locations of bony structures, the
integrity of disc heights, evidence of fractures, spondylosis, spondylolysis, or spondylolisthesis. X-rays do not
show any soft tissue details. X-ray imaging is displayed from white to black depending upon the density of the
structure through which X-ray radiation is shot. The range of densities go from high to low radiolucent—from
metal structures (white radiolucent) to bone (less white) to fat (gray) to muscle and fluid (much darker gray) to
air or gas (black radiolucent).
In many of our cases, we see “flexion-extension” X-rays. These X-rays are routinely taken in spinal injury cases
to determine whether there is any slippage or movement between two adjacent vertebral bodies. One X-ray is
taken while the patient is bending forward (flexion), and another X-ray is taken while the patient is bending
backwards (extension). When there is instability between two adjacent vertebral bodies, the physician can see
the difference in the orientation of each vertebrae to the other. This is the best evidence of spondylolisthesis or
any “mechanical” back or neck pain where MRI imaging may not show any pathology in the absence of any
herniated or displaced disc but where a patient has serious and severe symptoms of spinal pain with
movement. Flexion and extension MRI imaging can also show slippage between two adjacent spinal segments
but X-rays are less expensive.
For any diagnostic imaging, the terms of art include “AP” view, which means anterior to posterior view; “sagittal
view,” which means vertical planes passing through the body parallel to the median plane, dividing it into right
and left portions; also, “lateral view” is the term used for sagittal views in X-rays; and “axial” or “coronal view,”
which means looking down from the top, like looking at slices of a banana.
An MRI scan, with or without contrast material, can show soft tissue structures in and around the spine,
including the spinal cord, disc material, ligaments and muscles. MRI scans use a very powerful electro magnet
to excite the protons of differentiated cells in your body based on the water content of the cells in order to
process an image through computer programming. If you ever have had an MRI scan, you know that the
process takes about 40 minutes while you are inside a tube with less than an inch between the tip of your nose
and the tube. The machinery makes quite a racket, and you wear earplugs or headphones to keep your sanity
during the test. There are “open” MRI scanners and “closed” MRI scanners. Most orthopedic surgeons prefer
closed scanners since their imaging is more accurate than the open ones. There are a handful of MRI scanners
in California that can accommodate a morbidly obese patient, including at UCLA and Stanford University
Medical Centers.
So called “T1 or T2 weighted” images are “taken” when protons for each differentiated cells “relax” from a
higher state caused by the magnetic charge to ground state (T1) or from “wobbling” of protons during relaxation
Page 17 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
(T2). Fat appears bright (high signal intensity) on T1 weighted images while it can be dark (low signal intensity)
on T2 weighted images. Water and fluids in the body appear intermediately bright on T1 weighted and very
bright on T2 weighted images. T1 images usually show normal soft tissue anatomy and fat while T2 images
show fluid and pathology such as tumors, inflammation and trauma. Contrast material can show vascular
images and enhances images of tumors and inflammation. In spinal imaging, MRI scans typically show white
for high water content, showing the spinal fluid and water content within discs. Dark or black images show
structures with little or no water content.
MRI is preferred to CT scan when soft tissue contrast imaging is needed, for example, to view spinal cord
disorders, inflammation anywhere in the body, interarticular joints (like in the knee or hip) or any trauma. You
cannot use an MRI if an injured worker has any implanted metal that is magnetic, including implants such as
pacemakers, hearing aids or wires. However, many of the newer implanted surgical hardware is compatible
with MRI scanning, and there is no danger from a high power magnet.
CT scans take much less time to complete the imaging than do MRI scans, which is why CT scanning is
preferred in an emergency room. CT scans take about 10–20 minutes, depending upon the body part being
viewed. CT scans do involve exposure to X-ray radiation while MRI scanning does not. In fact, if a patient has
any metal inside their body that can be sensitive to a magnet, the patient cannot have an MRI and must have a
CT scan instead.
CT scans are more sensitive for certain tissue than are MRI scans. CT scans, for example, can detect internal
bleeding better than MRI imaging. CT scans can show differentiated structures—bone, muscle, glands, tumors,
blood vessels while MRI scans are better at showing cartilage and ligament tears and the spinal cord. CT scans
with gadolinium contrast are used to view scar tissue after a surgical procedure was performed if a patient has
a reoccurrence of symptoms. CT scans can show scar tissue better than MRI imaging. CT scans are preferred
to view nerves over MRI scans. Contrary to popular belief, it is not simple discretion when a physician orders an
MRI versus a CT scan—usually there is a specific medical reason for ordering one over the other. However,
that being said, the radiation exposure from a CT scan of the abdomen is 200–300 times the radiation exposure
from a plain film X-ray of the chest.
Many times you will see a reference in an MRI or CT scan report that refers to “modic changes.” This means
that there is evidence of swelling of bone in areas where there is degenerative disease of a disc and supporting
bony structures.
[13] Discograms and Myelograms
A very controversial medical procedure that has received a great deal of attention in our cases over the last five
years is the discogram. A discogram is an invasive procedure where pressure from a cannula is directed to a
disc while the patient is under a very light general anesthetic, but who is awake enough to respond to questions
by the physician about the test results. If the pressure from the cannula causes the same type and kind of
signs, symptoms and complaints the patient has in real life, then the test is considered “concordant pain” to the
level of disc that is thought to be a pain generator, in other words, a “positive” discogram. If there is no pain, no
complaints or the pain occurs in a “non-concordant way” or occurs during a “control” procedure, then the
discogram is considered “negative.”
In real clinical practice, discograms are used routinely in cases where there are multiple levels of pathology
within the spinal sub-region, usually the lumbar spine, and the physician does not know exactly what and where
the pain generator is originating. So a person could have degenerative disc disease at multiple levels, a
herniated disc at one level and stenosis at another level where there are severe, incapacitating symptoms. A
discogram could help the treating physician determine where the patient could benefit from spinal surgery, if at
all.
Discograms became unfavored recently and in light of mandatory utilization reviews under Labor Code § 4610.
There was a study conducted at Stanford University that has had wide dissemination that said that discograms
are unreliable and are based on too many subjective factors—some from the physician conducting the test and
some from the patient. In mid-2010, the author of the study wrote an article that backed off from his original
criticism of the test, stating that he essentially changed his mind.
Page 18 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
The fact of the matter is that a physician who performs the discogram can apply too much pressure on each
disc and make all discograms show “positive” results. Similarly, another physician can choose not to use
enough pressure and make all discograms “negative.” The most credible physicians who routinely perform
discograms know exactly what pressure to use for the testing equipment and will identify at least one disc that
is not diseased to be used as a “control” disc. The patient has no idea which disc is being tested. A discogram
is a useful tool for physicians to determine whether a patient with multiple-level lumbar pathology is a good
surgical candidate at a specific level. Discograms are not favored for cervical disc use.
A myelogram is also an invasive procedure where dye is injected into the spinal canal and if it “leaks” into
certain areas, a surgery site can be identified. These tests are painful and have potential side-effects, including
severe headaches, resulting in loss time from activities of daily living and work. However, myelograms are still
used in clinical practice.
An interesting note about discograms and myelograms—they are mentioned in the AMA Guides as accepted
“structural tests” for physicians to rely on in determining what spinal disorder applies in a given case when the
range of motion method is used to determine spinal impairment. See the footnote under Table 15-7 of the AMA
Guides. So when you receive a utilization review denial for a discogram or CT myelogram, you might want to
bring this footnote to the attention of the requesting physician, the claims administrator and ultimately to a
judge, if a dispute occurs over whether or not an injured worker should undergo these tests.
[14] Failed Lumbar Syndrome
What exactly is “failed lumbar syndrome?” The purpose of any surgery is to restore function and reduce pain
and disability. A failed lumbar syndrome occurs when none of the ultimate goals for surgery—functional
restoration and reduction of pain—are achieved. As any physician will tell you, the number one source of
impairment of function is pain. We know that pain cannot be empirically measured by any known medical test or
instrument. However, physicians know when there is a failure of lumbar surgery, and sometimes there are
objective factors that support the conclusion.
Oftentimes, we see an injured worker who has the classic signs, symptoms and complaints of a large herniated
lumbar disc that impinges on a nerve root. The standard of care is provided—medication, rest, mild exercises,
maybe physical therapy at first, then diagnostic imaging that confirms the herniated disc, then a series of
epidural steroid injections that do not work, ultimately resulting in a decompression lumbar laminectomy and
partial discectomy.
In cases that fail, there usually is a “honeymoon” period when the injured worker is happy he or she had the
surgery—the pain, numbness, leg weakness, and paresthesias are gone for the first time since an acute injury
occurred. Then within two to six months from the surgery date the symptoms gradually return, sometimes to
pain levels that are as high as or higher than they were prior to the surgery. The standard of care in these
cases is to do a post surgical CT scan with gadolinium contrast, which will show where scar tissue formation
has occurred. Remember, whenever you have surgery and tissue is removed, it is replaced by scar tissue, both
externally and internally. Every surgeon holds his or her breath that when scar tissue, called fibrous tissue,
forms post-surgically, it will not impinge on nerve roots. If it does, then there is trouble for the injured worker.
We do know that the surgeon cannot just go back into the lumbar spine and cut out the scar tissue. Why not?
Because if you do that, there is no guarantee that the scar tissue will not come back. This is why if the post-
surgical diagnostic imaging does not show any new pathology, such as a new herniated disc, a disc fragment
that broke off or spinal instability, then usually a repeat lumbar surgery is not reasonable or necessary. Every
AME quality physician will tell you that repeat surgery on any body part is trouble—especially on the spine. This
means that the chances of a poor outcome from repeat surgery is significantly higher than if there is only one
surgery.
There are different types of failed lumbar syndrome—neurogenic, discogenic, mechanical, and arthritic.
Neurogenic refers to nerve root irritation or specific nerve damage and is characterized by burning and/or
radiating types of pain complaints. Oftentimes, we see nerve inflammation after a spinal surgery where
additional post surgical epidural or caudal injections are used to reduce the swelling. Sometimes, we see scar
tissue that again entraps a nerve or nerve root after a decompression surgery; tragically, the original nerve root
Page 19 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
irritation is caused by a herniated disc and post surgically, the nerve root irritation is caused by post-surgical
scar tissue formation.
Remember, no matter what part of the body is operated on, the cost of surgery to the patient is the ultimate
scar formation, which is part of the body’s way of healing itself. In virtually any surgical procedure, there will be
scar formation, internally and externally. The goal and hope of any surgeon are that post surgical scar formation
is minimal.
Discogenic pain refers to pain caused by disease to the discs, including degenerative disc disease, herniated or
extruded disc or disc fragments that are in the spinal canal or near any neural foramina. This can cause the
muscle spasms, radiating pain and other classic lumbar spinal symptoms. By the way, the AMA Guides on
pages 382 and 383 refers to asymmetrical muscle spasm, guarding and so forth. In lumbar spinal cases, an
examining physician would expect there to be asymmetry in the way the paraspinal muscles react to a one-
sided disc herniation or other pathology.
Mechanical pain refers to pain caused by spinal instability—such as after a compression fracture,
spondylolisthesis, spondylolysis, or from total collapse of a disc exposing bone on bone.
Arthritis pain can be caused mainly by spondylosis—the degeneration of the discs and the bony articulating
surfaces of the joints and vertebral bodies. The pain and symptoms from arthritis falls along a spectrum from
absolutely no pain, signs, symptoms, or complaints at all to totally incapacitating pain. In fact, there is significant
literature on arthritis where many people at autopsy show significant degenerative disc disease, facet joint
hypertrophy and spondylosis but with no history of medical treatment, no medical records of signs, symptoms
or complaints and no evidence of disability despite having access to health care and a history of consistent
visits to a personal physician for other reasons. On the other side of the coin, there are plenty of patients who
have mild signs of arthritis with severe symptoms. In fact, consistent research shows that there is no correlation
between degenerative disc disease (DDD) and impairment of function. This is one of the vexing issues faced by
evaluating physicians in determining whether or not an industrial spinal injury that results in permanent
impairment can be apportioned in part to a history of DDD.
In some cases, one objective finding that can cause failed lumbar syndrome is arachnoiditis, which is scar
tissue formation after lumbar surgery that extends around nerve roots and sometimes encroaches into the
spinal canal. The term “arachnoiditis” refers to a “spider-web”-like configuration of scar tissue. It is impossible to
remove this type of scar tissue, and the prognosis is grim for these unfortunate patients. There is no known
cause of arachnoiditis, and no one can predict who is at risk of having this condition post-surgically. Some of
these patients end up having an intrathecal pain pump implanted for pain control.
Another example of objective findings that can cause failed lumbar syndrome is when a fusion stabilizes a
severely degenerated disc space but there is still motion segment instability or nerve root irritation at or above
or below the level of the fusion. Physicians are reluctant to extend fusions to higher or lower levels unless and
until there is additional adjacent segmental degeneration or instability at one or both levels.
The worse nightmare case from everyone’s standpoint is when there is a failed lumbar syndrome with no
apparent objective findings on why the patient is in severe, intractable pain. However, the epidemiological data
shows that even outside the workers’ compensation system, there are a significant number of people who
develop incapacitating lumbar spinal pain where the physician cannot pinpoint the pain generator. Whether the
pain is based on objective findings or not, we have seen cases where the injured worker has a pre-morbid
history of good productivity, consistent earnings and a “normal” lifestyle.
After a spinal injury, there is a 100-pound weight gain, sedentary lifestyle, development of hypertension,
diabetes, heart disease, chronic pain, and depression, all hallmarks of metabolic syndrome. In these patients,
we see “sacropenia,” which means the loss of muscle mass because of inactivity, replaced by fat tissue. What
we see in these individuals is exactly akin to the frailty of aging. However, the process in injured individuals with
failed lumbar syndrome such as these is where the physiology of aging becomes the physiology of an industrial
injury. The treatment of these patients is problematic—there has to be a multiple disciplinary approach with
hopefully a nurse case manager who is a patient advocate instead of a cost containment nurse. In fact,
metabolic syndrome can occur in any chronic pain case.
[15] Treatment in Chronic Pain Cases
Page 20 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
Chronic pain syndromes are not limited to failed lumbar syndrome; however, it seems that most of our cases
that involve chronic pain start off as a spinal injury. Other cases involve neuropathic pain, complex regional pain
syndrome (CRPS), sympathetically maintained pain phenomena, or simply “chronic pain” from an upper or
lower extremity injury. Always remember, the standard of care in any chronic pain case is for a primary treating
physician to make sure all reasonable medical and surgical treatment possibilities have been exhausted before
a patient should be referred to a pain management specialist. Very often, a surgeon will pull the trigger and
refer the patient out to a pain management physician when other, more viable treatment approaches are
available first.
That being said, however, a quality pain specialist may help identify that a biopsychosocial approach is needed
and/or offers treatment that is a part of reasonable medical care instead of surgery or standard medical care
from a primary treating physician who does not have pain management experience. So a patient who is
showing signs and symptoms of a chronic pain syndrome should be referred during primary treatment for the
underlying condition to a pain management physician who can assess the biopsychosocial aspects of
treatment.
It is too easy for primary care physicians, both inside and outside the workers’ compensation system, to simply
prescribe pain medication to chronic pain patients. This approach is becoming more and more the standard of
care and is creating too many iatrogenic addictions to opiate based medications [see [26], below]. A 90-day
supply of Vicodin® (also known as hydrocodone) ES 750 mg taken four times per day (360 tablets) costs
$252.00 (fee schedule price). It is the least expensive way any HMO, personal physician or primary treating
physician can handle a patient who constantly complains of severe pain and where all reasonable medical and
surgical procedures have been exhausted or not authorized.
The proper standard of care in pain management is to first make sure there are no other medical or surgical
procedures to be conducted prior to referral to a pain management specialist. Then the national standard of
care is for a pain management specialist to detoxify the injured worker from any Schedule II narcotics (ones
that are opiate based, known as “opioid analgesic drugs”). The ultimate goal of pain management is exactly
that—to train a chronic pain patient how to manage the pain rather than allowing the pain to manage the
patient. The goal is to restore ADL and work functioning and reduce the pain-related disabilities and impairment
of function. In many cases, some patients do fine on opiates—the standard of care for these patients is
medication optimization and finding the right combination of treatments to optimize function.
When pain management fails, the end-point of pain management is to implant a spinal stimulator or to
ultimately implant a “morphine pump.” Morphine pumps were originally designed and intended for end-stage
cancer patients but which have miraculously emerged into the workers’ compensation arena and for the general
population who do not have end-stage disease. Remember a very important point—even a quadriplegic’s life
expectancy is compromised only 5%, so most of the chronic pain patients we see in our cases who are not
quadriplegic have a normal chronological life expectancy.
The idea with an implanted drug delivery system is that only a narrow range of opiate based medication is
directed to the pain generator site and not systemically through the blood stream. This results in less opiate
medication being introduced into the body and allows for fewer side effects. Usually the range for an intrathecal
pump is 16–24 mg of medication being infused every two to four hours. The problem is that if the medication is
reduced for some reason (doctor’s order, pump malfunction) by even a few milligrams, the patient goes into
withdrawal, which has the same symptoms a heroin addict experiences when he or she does not get a fix.
Within our law practice during the last 30 years, experience shows that many injured workers who have had
either a spinal stimulator or intrathecal morphine pump implanted have them removed within five years of their
installation, usually due to bad side-effects or ineffective pain reduction. Morphine pumps themselves need to
be surgically replaced every five years due to normal wear and tear. These patients usually revert back to oral
opiate medication.
A popular and effective method to treat chronic pain from any source is to prescribe an anti-depressant
medication. The dose needed for pain control is often less than that which is used for depression. This is an
example of what is called “off-label” use of an FDA approved drug, which is perfectly legal. For example,
originally amitriptyline (Elavil® or Endep®) was intended to treat depression as a tricyclic antidepressant. Quite
by accident, it was discovered after FDA approval of Elavil that people who were taking this drug for depression
Page 21 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
and who also had a chronic pain syndrome, felt better with respect to both their depression and their pain
syndrome.
The same effect occurred with SSRI (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) medication such as Paxil®,
Prozac®, Effexor®, Zoloft®, and the newer generation of this class of anti-depressant drugs, myofacial pain or
fibromyalgia. Pain specialists are now discovering that Cymbalta®, an anti-depressant, also has pain
modulating effects and is especially effective for patients with myofacial pain or fibromyalgia. It is not unusual
for us to see these drugs prescribed along with pain medication, anti-inflammatory and muscle relaxant drugs in
chronic pain cases. Also, neuroleptic (anti-seizure) drugs such as gabapentin and pregabalin (Neurontin® and
Lyrica®, respectively) were originally formulated as anti-seizure medications but also were found to reduce
nerve-based burning type pain.
Many utilization review denials exist for these drugs on the grounds that no psychiatric claim is pending—
however, these psychotropic and neuroleptic drugs have pain modulating effects and they should be allowed as
an inexpensive part of treatment for chronic pain. Of course, the side effects of these psychotropic and
neuroleptic drugs include weight gain, decreased libido and drowsiness. In any case, a weight gain of 5–10% is
clinically significant and should create concern of physicians who prescribe these drugs in chronic pain cases
since these patients are already at risk of gaining weight due to inactivity from the pain they experience.
[16] Wrist and Hand
[a] Three Main Nerves
Hand and wrist injuries are among the most frequent industrial injury cases we see in our law practices, but
little is really known by attorneys about the medical aspects of them. The upper extremities, including the
arms, wrists and hands, are innervated by three main nerves—the median, ulnar, and radial. Nerves
function in three ways—sensory, motor, and autonomic.
The autonomic nervous system (ANS or visceral nervous system) is the part of the peripheral nervous
system that acts as a control system functioning largely below the level of consciousness, and controls
visceral functions. The ANS affects heart rate, digestion, respiration rate, salivation, perspiration, diameter
of the pupils, micturition (urination), and sexual arousal. Whereas most of its actions are involuntary, some,
such as breathing, work in tandem with the conscious mind. It is classically divided into two subsystems:
the parasympathetic nervous system and sympathetic nervous system.
Sensory function includes, of course, pain. The back of your hands has fewer sensory nerves than the palm
side of your hand. If you get a laceration on the back of a finger, it hurts but it usually does not interfere with
gripping or grasping. On the other hand, no pun intended, if you get a laceration on the palm side of the
distal end of a finger, it will hurt more and cause difficulty with gripping and grasping using the injured finger
for a while.
Some understanding of the locations of structures in the hand are important for following some of the
chapters, tables and methods in the AMA Guides for hand and wrist injuries. The radial side of the hand is
on the side of your hand where your thumb and radius bone are located. The radial pulse is felt below the
wrist joint and below the thumb—at the distal end of the radius bone. The ulnar side of the hand is on the
same side as your pinky finger running along the ulna bone to the elbow. Your hand and forearm have a
series of flexor and extensor tendons and pulley systems that allow you to move your hand, wrist, make a
fist and point your fingers at your opponent. These structures are all complex and hand surgeons enjoy the
challenge that not every person has the same exact morphology or location of these structures.
The median nerve is located on the palm side of your hands, at the wrist joint. It travels through the carpal
canal and branches out in the hand and innervates most of the sensory function of the thumb, index, middle
and the radial side of the ring finger. The ulnar nerve travels around the elbow joint along the ulnar side of
the arm to Guyon’s canal in the wrist where it branches out and is responsible for most of the sensory and
motor function of the small finger (pinky) and the ulnar side of the ring finger. Most of our grip strength
comes from the ulnar side of the hand—that is why most of the ability to grip is from the pinky, ring fingers
and thumb (which is innervated for motor function from all three peripheral nerves).
Page 22 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
[b] Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Carpal tunnel syndrome is not a disease process, but it is a description of events that lead to the symptoms
of the condition. Repetitive motion injuries cause the median nerve at the wrist to get irritated and inflamed
causing pain, numbness, paresthesias (feelings of pins and needles), weakness, and night pain. Even an
acute injury to the wrist can cause carpal tunnel syndrome such as when a person who falls extends their
hand to break the fall and there is a direct trauma on the wrist and carpal canal areas. Carpal tunnel
syndrome is probably the most frequent repetitive motion claimed body part injured.
There is a well-known but now dated longitudinal study that concluded that 20% of the population who
engage in at least five hours a day of hand intensive work activities, five days a week, will develop some
kind of overuse syndrome involving the hand, wrist, shoulder or cervical spine, or any combination of these
parts of body. The study went on to suggest that these patients are also at increased risk for C5–C6
degenerative arthritis due to the physical stress of repetitive use of the upper extremities on the cervical
spine. No one really knows why 80% of the population who perform hand intensive work activities DO NOT
develop an overuse syndrome. But remember, California law only requires that repetitive work activities
constitute a contributing factor to the development of an overuse syndrome in order to sustain a viable
workers’ compensation claim of cumulative trauma.
The standard of care to diagnose carpal tunnel syndrome is for a treating physician to order EMG/NCV
tests along with a clinical examination that includes the Tinel’s sign and Phalen’s test. A word of what an
EMG/NCV does is appropriate here. An EMG/NCV actually is a series of nerve tests. The EMG needle
exam or “electromyography” measures the electrical system that controls muscle contractions and
relaxation—from the central spinal cord. So if an EMG is positive, it is bad news for the injured worker—it
means that there probably is nerve damage coming from peripheral nerves.
An NCV is a nerve conduction velocity (electrical shock) test that determines if there is any problem with
peripheral nerves—for the upper extremity, the median, ulnar and radial nerves; for the lower extremity,
mainly the sciatic, tibial or peroneal nerves. Nerve conduction studies can show if there is any latency delay
in the time it takes a signal to travel along a nerve distribution for sensory and motor functioning. If there is
an abnormality, the cause could be in the wrist due to swelling in the median nerve from compression at the
carpal canal, for example, or at the elbow for ulnar nerve irritation (cubital tunnel syndrome). Up to 15% of
confirmed carpal tunnel syndrome cases are electrodiagnostically negative, despite the patient showing
classic signs, symptoms and complaints of carpal tunnel syndrome. Like so many hand surgeons have said
in these cases, “you don’t operate on a nerve conduction study, you operate on a patient who has the
symptoms,” meaning that the EMG/NCV is just a test and is not always definitive on a correct diagnosis of
carpal tunnel syndrome. The EMG/NCV is still the Gold Standard and you should have some concern and
consider a second opinion if surgery is recommended with a normal test.
The Tinel’s sign is a clinical test a physician performs by tapping his or her fingers on the patient’s carpal
canal to see if the symptoms of numbness, tingling and paresthesias can be elicited. The Phalen’s test
involves having the patient flex his or her wrist and hold the position to see if tingling occurs. In fact, the
reason patients who truly have carpal tunnel syndrome complain bitterly of night pains and waking up due
to wrist and arm symptoms is because we have a tendency to hold our wrists in a flexed position during
deep sleep, thereby compressing the median nerve at the carpal canal.
The standard of care in carpal tunnel syndrome cases is for the physician to first prescribe anti-
inflammatory drugs. A provocative cortisone injection is both diagnostic and therapeutic in that if the
injection works, it confirms the diagnosis and helps the patient, perhaps without surgery but with ergonomic
adjustments to a work setting. The last resort results in a carpal tunnel release in which the entrapped
median nerve is decompressed by having the carpal ligament cut, which frees the entrapped median nerve.
Long term and untreated carpal tunnel syndrome can result in moderate or severe symptoms that may also
include associated trigger finger, thenar and hypothenar atrophy. The thenar area is the muscle area on
lower thumb part of the palm that allows you to move your thumb to your pinky. The thenar muscles are
innervated by the median nerve. The hypothenar muscles are below the pinky on the lateral palm side of
the hand and oppose the thenar muscles. The hypothenar muscles are innervated by the ulnar nerve. If
Page 23 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
there is atrophy of these muscles, chances are the muscles will not redevelop, resulting in severe
impairment of function of the entire hand.
The good news is that in the real medical world, 85% of all patients who have carpal tunnel release surgery
recover with little or no residuals except some permanent weakness in gripping and grasping. In fact the
most common complaint post-surgically for patients who have had successful carpal tunnel release surgery
is weakness and some disfigurement from the surgical scar. There is some controversy over whether
endoscopic releases are as effective as an open surgical procedure with a curvilinear incision. The
literature seems to favor an open procedure over endoscopic ones at this point, depending upon whose
research you rely.
As in any surgical procedure, the greatest risks of a carpal tunnel surgery are infection or scar tissue
formation. If scar tissue forms, it could again cause entrapment of the median nerve. There is a
“honeymoon” period for the injured worker after the carpal tunnel surgery and as scar tissue forms around
the nerve, after which the symptoms may return. We have seen many carpal tunnel “redo” surgeries where
the surgeon has to debride the scar tissue and hope that when it returns, it will not again entrap the median
nerve.
The most misunderstood method of rating carpal tunnel syndrome cases involves the use of Tables 16-10,
16-11, and 16-15 of the AMA Guides. Table 16-15 is the chart that gives you the maximum upper extremity
ratings for sensory and motor function for each nerve. The median nerve has a maximum value of 39 UE
for sensory and 10 UE for motor function while the ulnar nerve has a maximum value of 35 UE for motor
function and 7 UE for sensory.
Table 16-10 and 16-11 provide the grades of sensory and motor impairment of function where you multiply
the percentage loss of sensory (Table 16-10) and motor (Table 16-11) times the maximum value of each
sensory and motor function of each nerve using Table 16-15 to get UE impairment ratings. Then you
multiply UE times 60% to obtain a WPI rating for sensory and motor impairments for each nerve. See Ch. 3,
§ 3.16 of this guidebook.
The controversy in rating carpal tunnel syndrome begins on page 495 of the AMA Guides, which describe a
very strict and frankly unrealistic approach to evaluating impairment of function of these cases. The authors
who wrote page 495 ignored the classifications of Tables 16-10 and 16-11 in reference to the grades of
sensory and motor impairment for each nerve. Notice the actual language from Table 16-10 for Grades 0
through 5—the Table itself is titled “Determining Impairment of the Upper Extremity Due to Sensory Deficits
OR Pain Resulting From Peripheral Nerve Disorders.” Notice the authors use the term “or” between the
words sensory deficits and pain. Throughout each grade, pain is separately rated.
For example, a Grade 3 sensory deficit from Table 16-10 says: “Distorted superficial tactile sensibility
(diminished light touch and two point discrimination), with some abnormal sensations OR slight pain, that
interferes with some activities.” Notice the word “or” again separates sensory deficits from pain. A Grade 3
rates between 26% to 60% of the maximum value of the nerve, which in the case of the median nerve in
carpal tunnel cases is 39% UE rating (from Table 16-15). So a 60% sensory deficit due to slight pain that
interferes with some activities is a 23% UE rating (60% of 39%) or a 14% WPI rating. This analysis has
nothing to do with Almaraz-Guzman II or Guzman III [see Ch. 7, § 7.06[3][c] of this guidebook] and is based
upon a strict rating in Tables 16-10, 16-11 and 16-15. Notice that step 3 under Part b. Procedure of Table
16-10 says “Grade the severity of the sensory deficit OR pain according to the classification given above
(a). Use clinical judgment to select the appropriate percentage from the range of values shown for each
severity grade.” Again, sensory deficits are separate from “pain.”
Most physicians and attorneys are missing this method in rating carpal tunnel syndrome cases. The editors
of the AMA Guides allowed the text on page 495 to co-exist with these tables and this separate method of
rating impairment in the wrist that is nerve related even though the instructions on page 495 are
inconsistent with the method described in Table 16-10. When counsel takes the deposition of physicians in
carpal tunnel syndrome cases, a close reading of Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15 will ultimately result in
more accurate ratings for this condition than blindly following the general instructions for carpal tunnel
syndrome on page 495.
Page 24 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
Another condition we occasionally see in our cases involve problems with the ulnar nerve at the Guyon’s
canal. This is in the wrist where the ulnar nerve branches out and innervates the small finger and the ulnar
side of the ring finger. When an injured worker has both carpal tunnel syndrome and compression at the
Guyon’s canal, the entire hand is painful with numbness, tingling, night pains, weakness and so on. When
the surgeon performs the carpal tunnel release surgery for the median nerve, it takes only an additional five
to ten minutes to also release the compression of the ulnar nerve at the Guyon’s canal. However, there is
one big problem if an injured worker complains that his or her whole hand has symptoms.
If a person is having numbness, tingling, pain, and weakness and dropping things due to hand symptoms,
the differential diagnosis could be compression of the median nerve at the carpal canal and compression of
the ulnar nerve at the Guyon’s canal or there could be a lesion at the cervical spine compressing nerves at
the C5-C6 level causing the same symptoms. There have been many cases when a nerve conduction
study shows carpal tunnel syndrome at the wrist and ulnar nerve irritation at the wrist or elbow, surgeries
are performed at the wrist or elbow or both to decompress the nerves and the patient still has symptoms.
This is due to an ignored cervical spine injury that may cause the same symptoms as the peripheral nerve
conditions. The differential diagnosis would also include ulnar compromise at the elbow, thoracic outlet
syndrome and cervical radiculopathy.
If you see a case that involves an injured worker who is complaining that the entire hand is having
symptoms, you always have to be suspicious of a cervical spine disc problem as well as a peripheral nerve
problem and you should always suggest that the injured worker obtain an MRI of the cervical spine as well
as an EMG/NCV. This is because a C6 nerve root irritation causes the same symptoms as are caused by
carpal tunnel syndrome and ulnar nerve irritation.
Carpal tunnel syndrome can be caused by certain thyroid conditions. Contrary to opinions expressed by
some physicians, carpal tunnel syndrome alone is not caused by diabetes. Diabetes can increase the risk
of a person developing carpal tunnel syndrome but diabetes alone is not causative unless there is a
diabetic polyneuropathy. Diabetic polyneuropathies begin in the lower extremities (tested with a filament or
pin prick test on the bottom of the feet) and eventually may occur in the upper extremities. However, the
term “diabetic polyneuropathy” means that the diabetes is affecting all peripheral nerves, not just the
median, ulnar or radial nerve alone.
So if you have a case involving carpal tunnel syndrome and the NCV is negative for the ulnar and radial
nerves, then the patient does not have diabetic polyneuropathy involving the upper extremities. A physician
will not be able to apportion impairment from industrially related carpal tunnel syndrome due to diabetes in
the absence of evidence that the diabetes is affecting all three peripheral nerves in the upper extremities.
Although diabetes is a risk factor for a patient to develop carpal tunnel syndrome, there has to be a causal
link between carpal tunnel syndrome and a diabetic polyneuropathy.
[c] Current Medical Review
The most recent research on carpal tunnel syndrome, de Quervain’s tenosynovitis, trigger finger, and
basilar carpal-metacarpal arthritis at the base of the thumb has been released in the form of a
comprehensive article published in June 2022 in the Journal of the American Medical Association [Journal
of the American Medical Association, Vol. 327, Number 24; pp. 2434-2445, June 28, 2022]. The JAMA
article is a summary or compendium of the published research on these conditions between 2012 and 2022
that were accessed through PubMed. The preamble of the JAMA article includes the assertion that these
four conditions “can be associated with significant disability.” Workers’ compensation practitioners know this
from their experience.
Counsel’s knowledge of the medicine involved in these upper extremity conditions will assist in preparing
for depositions of medical-legal evaluators or treating physicians. Knowing the diagnostic criteria, causation
of each condition, and prognosis will assist counsel in reading and understanding medical reports,
especially in the physical examination section of medical reports. In reading those sections of medical
reports, counsel will know what may be left out of the examination that may bear relevance to the diagnosis
or impairment rating of a condition involving the upper extremity.
Page 25 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
The JAMA article forms the basis for updating the upper extremity section in Chapter 8, “Medical
Information Every Lawyer & Judge Should Know” of this guidebook pertaining to these four commonly seen
diagnoses in our cases. The JAMA article is intended to educate physicians on the latest epidemiology,
pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of these conditions. The article is a result of a review
of 6,756 scientific articles including studies involving “meta-analyses, systematic reviews, practice
guidelines, randomized clinical trials, and articles with the highest study quality and greatest interest to the
generalist clinician.”
Counsel is reminded that the radial side of the hand is where the thumb is located (where the radius bone
of the arm meets the wrist) and the ulnar side of the hand is where the little finger is located (where the ulna
bone of the arm meets the wrist). Therefore, the radial side of the ring finger is the side that faces the radius
or the thumb.
The co-authors of the JAMA CTS update caution its readers that the studies reviewed have not been
formally evaluated for quality of the research and some relevant studies may have been missed. In
addition, they caution that they did not cover all possible diagnosis and treatment of these hand conditions.
Finally, they caution that this review is not intended to apply conclusions to the general population. These
limitations are standard in a literature review type of study and the medical-legal community needs to
understand the context of this review. This review is not a compendium of a community standard of medical
care but is a review of recent studies involving some hand conditions.
Counsel needs to question physicians based on the diagnostic studies mentioned in this summary of the
JAMA article which will assist in the development of the medical record in workers’ compensation cases.
The authors in the JAMA article sum it up perfectly: “Carpal tunnel syndrome, trigger finger, de Quervain’s
tenosynovitis, and thumb CMC joint arthritis can be associated with significant disability. First-line treatment
for each condition consists of non-steriodal medication, steroid injection, immobilization, or a combination.
For patients who do not respond to noninvasive therapy or for progressive disease despite conservative
therapy, surgical treatment is safe and effective.” JAMA-6-28-2022; 327-24-2443.
CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME (CTS) is a clinical condition involving compression of the median nerve
under the transverse carpal ligament of wrist at the carpal canal. The median nerve provides sensation to
the thumb, index, and middle fingers, part of the ring finger (radial side) and the motor function of the arm
and hand. See Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15 of the AMA Guides for the sensory and motor maximum
upper extremity impairment values of the median nerve. CTS can be progressive beginning with narrowing
of the nerve followed by swelling of the nerve and carpal canal, followed by nerve degeneration and
eventual loss of the nerve itself in very rare cases. The etiology of CTS includes local trauma, tumor, or
systemic causes such as pregnancy, obesity, diabetes, hypothyroidism, or amyloidosis (a build-up of
amyloid proteins in a person’s organ or organs). One retrospective study indicated that CTS is more
prevalent in women and people between the ages of 41 and 60 with a general population prevalence of
14.4%.
Presenting symptoms and their prevalence include numbness along the median sensory nerve distribution
(94% of patients with a positive EMG/NCV); pain in the median nerve distribution (58% of patients); and
weakness (16.5%). Symptoms may awake someone with CTS or progress to constant numbness.
Diagnosis of CTS on examination include the following tests:
• Durkan test—examiner applies pressure to the patient's carpal canal to reproduce symptoms (64%
sensitivity/83% specificity which mean that this test is accurate for the diagnosis of CTS)
• Phalen test—Patient flexes both wrists together with dorsal surfaces (the backs of the hands)
touching (90 degree flexion) and fingers pointing downward for 20 to 30 seconds to reproduce
symptoms (68% sensitivity/73% specificity)
• Tinel sign—Examiner repeatedly and firmly taps patient’s wrist above the carpal tunnel to reproduce
symptoms (50% sensitivity/77% specificity).
• EMG/NCV—electromyography-nerve conduction velocities study show slowing of the median nerve
for sensory and/or motor function
Page 26 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
• 72% of hand surgeons ordered and obtained an EMG/NVC prior to performing surgical carpal tunnel
release. The authors of the article state: “If history and physical examination results are classic
(numbness or tingling in the thumb, index, middle, and radial ring fingers mostly at night), then an
EMG/NCV study is up to the hand specialist’s discretion. EMG/NCV studies can capture other
neurologic pathology such as radiculopathy, can provide a base line for future management, and
may be used to determine treatment recovery times.” [medical citations omitted].
• The “flick” test. This is a test that a physician may ask a patient to flick their affected hand/wrist
multiple times. If that action relieves the numbness and tingling then the test is positive for CTS.
• “CTS-6 Questionnaire” has six questions and has a 91% sensitivity and 94% specificity:  Rate the
following:  none-mild-moderate-severe-very severe for:
o Pain at night
o Pain during the day
o Numbness or tingling at night
o Numbness or tingling during the day
o How often did the symptoms keep you up at night (Never – Once – 2 or 3 Times – 4 or 5 times –
More than 5 times):
▪ Pain
▪ Numbness or tingling
• Ultrasound of the wrist/carpal canal shows an hour-glass deformity of the median nerve, proximal
nerve swelling, or both when it is compressed in the carpal canal. (81% sensitivity, 84%
specificity).
The term sensitivity means that the test accurately shows median nerve dysfunction and the term specificity
means the accuracy of the specific diagnosis of CTS as a result of a positive test. The authors also indicate
that if conservative treatment does not work within 6 weeks or if the patient has moderate to severe signs or
symptoms (hand weakness; thenar or hypothenar atrophy, or constant numbness) then the treating
physician should refer the patient to a hand surgeon. The CTS-6 Questionnaire is a self-report that many
physicians may use to narrow the list of possible diagnoses and to determine the severity of symptoms that
a patient is presenting.
The authors of the JAMA article identify occupational risks for workers to develop CTS. However, they point
out that the medical literature still lacks empirical evidence of direct causation of CTS with occupational
activities. Therefore, current medical research identifies the following activities that show an increase in
prevalence of people developing CTS:
• Repetitive tasks such as computer or mouse use
• Excessive force or gripping such as use of heavy machinery
• Occupations associated with hand tasks involving vibrations
• Office workers with more than 4 hours of computer use
Counsel should be aware that work activities that involve “injurious exposure” can be a “contributing factor”
to the development of any medical condition. Direct causation of a medical condition is not required for
compensability of a work-related injury. See McAllister v. WCAB (1968) 69 Cal. 2d 408, 445 P.2d 313, 71
Cal. Rptr. 697, 33 Cal. Comp. Cases 660; South Coast Framing v. WCAB (2015) 61 Cal. 4th 291, 349 P.3d
141, 188 Cal. Rptr. 3d 46, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 489.
Even though this guidebook is not a reference guide for treatment protocols, a brief discussion of the
current treatment for CTS is appropriate for completion of the subject. First line treatment for CTS includes
(1) avoiding activities that cause the symptoms, (2) night-time wrist neutral immobilization/wrist brace, and
(3) physical therapy range of motion exercises with “nerve gliding” exercises. Ultrasonically guided steroid
Page 27 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
injections in the wrist temporarily relieve symptoms for two to four weeks but does not result in persistent
symptom relief.
A 2020 meta-analysis study showed that carpal tunnel surgery resulted in better functional status and
symptom relief after six months compared to a non-surgical group. Open CTS surgery compared to
endoscopic CTS surgery had the same positive treatment results with endoscopic patients improving
sooner than with open CTS surgery. Complications from CTS surgery can occur and may include
hypertrophic or painful scarring, infection (in only .36% of cases); failure of treatment with reoccurrence of
symptoms (7% - 25% reported), or rare injury to the median nerve (.21%) or nearby neurovascular
structures (less than .1% of cases).
TRIGGER FINGER
The correct medical term for trigger finger is “stenosing tenosynovitis.” Trigger finger occurs when there is
not a smooth flexion and extension of a finger. Smooth flexion and extension of a finger is lacking when
there is a size difference between the tendon and the tendon sheath where one is larger or wider, or the
other is smaller or narrower. These differences cause inflammation of the first annular pulley of the flexor
tendon sheath that is located on the palmer side of the hand at the base of the affected finger. This swelling
causes a mechanical obstruction during flexion or extension of the affected finger. This condition arises in
2% of the general population and up to 20% of people with diabetes.
Trigger finger more commonly occurs in women than in men and mostly involves the ring finger and
secondly the thumb. People with diabetes sometimes have multiple finger involvement. The symptoms
include pain at the base of the affected finger on the palm side of the hand, crepitus when bending or
extending the affected finger, locking of the finger in flexion, and painful popping of the finger during flexion
or extension. The examining physician needs to rule out other causes of these symptoms to include
infection, extensor tendonitis, Dupuytren’s contracture, and CTS.
Treatment includes NSAIDs, avoidance of repetitive gripping or pinching, splinting, and steroid injection.
Steroid injections have a 57% success rate—meaning there is long-term resolution of symptoms and
functional restoration. However, there is also a 22% relapse rate with steroid injections. If the steroid
injection does not have long lasting effect then surgical release of the A1 pulley at the base of the affected
finger is recommended with a high frequency of successful treatment. The authors warn about the use of
long-term splinting due to reduced efficacy over time. The relapse rate for surgical release of the A1 pulley
is less than 1%.  For patients who have insulin dependent diabetes, steroid injections for trigger finger is not
recommended because blood glucose levels increase for 24 to 48 hours after an injection. For insulin
dependent diabetics, splinting and surgical release are the only options for invasive treatment.
The surgery is simple for experienced hand specialists and they simply transect the pulley where the
tendon has restricted motion. Surgical release of the A1 pulley at the base of the affected finger on the
palm side can sometimes be difficult because there are so many other structures nearby including digital
nerves and blood vessels that are hard to visualize. At 12 months follow up, surgical release was
successful in 94% of cases with a low recurrence rate of 6%. There can be some rare complications from
surgical release of the A1 pulley as there are with any invasive surgery.
DE-QUERVAIN’S TENOSYNOVITIS
This condition affects the radial side of the hand from the middle joint of the thumb down to the radial side
of the wrist and lower arm. People who suffer from De-Quervain’s experience pain and discomfort along the
outside of the thumb down to the wrist. The condition involves thickening and degenerative changes of the
synovial sheath containing the first dorsal extensor tendons. The first dorsal extensor tendons consist of the
abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis. The degenerative changes are characterized by
fibrosis but are not inflammatory.
Patients have pain or tenderness over the dorsal-radial aspect of the wrist and radial side of the forearm
along the course of the extensor tendons. Symptoms are aggravated by thumb movement. What this
means in layman terms is that the symptoms of De-Quervain’s originate in the back of the affected thumb
and pain travels down the back of the thumb towards the wrist and forearm of the affected arm.
Page 28 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
The condition affects about .5% of men and 1.3% of women and pregnancy is a risk factor. A 2013 meta-
analysis indicated a “significant correlation between de-Quervain’s tenosynovitis and repetitive, forceful, or
ergonomically stressful manual work, such as assembly line, factory, or garment related work. However, no
definite causal relationship between occupational risk factors and de-Quervain tenosynovitis has been
established.” As indicated above, California law recognizes causation based on work activities being a
contributing factor to the diagnosis.
Interestingly enough, there is an increased prevalence of the condition that has been documented in
younger populations in association with smartphone use. In a study of 491 participants aged 18 to 25 years
reported that 53% had positive provocative signs of de Quervain’s, all with a higher median number of
hours per day of smartphone usage (8 hours vs. 5 hours). In 2020 a review of studies that included 9408
participants who used mobile phones found that 51% had physical signs of provocative de Quervain’s
tenosynovitis. Anecdotally, when Blackberry smart phones became popular, a condition known as
“Blackberry Thumb” seemed to become quite common among some chronic users of that type of mobile
phone. The ergonomics of smart phones have improved significantly from the old-style flip phones of the
1980s and 1990s but it appears that overuse of current cell phones can still contribute to de Quervain’s
tenosynovitis.
The diagnosis is challenging since there are a number of other conditions that can cause the symptoms.
However, the Finkelstein maneuver can help diagnose the condition along with the patient’s history and
physical examination by the physician. The Finkelstein maneuver involves the patient grasping their thumb
with a closed fist and moving the wrist in the opposite direction of the thumb (deviating the wrist in the ulnar
direction) to hyperflex the thumb. This maneuver reliably produces or aggravates the symptoms. The
Finkelstein test while not clearly sensitive due to other possible diagnoses, but has high specificity.
Like the other upper extremity conditions mentioned in this section, people diagnosed with de Quervain’s
should be referred to a hand specialist if 6 weeks of non-operative treatment has not relieved the
symptoms. First line treatment includes NSAIDs, thumb spica immobilization (which immobilizes the thumb
and the wrist), or a corticosteroid injection. The injection has shown 84% of patients experience
improvement of symptoms and functional improvement compared with control groups.
Injection plus immobilization resulted in even better outcomes than either modality alone. In fact a study of
over 33,000 patients demonstrated that an initial steroid injection relieved symptoms in 72% of patients and
repeat injections also relieved over 60% of patients who needed two or three injections. Surgery consisting
of releasing the dorsal extensor compartment through open, endoscopic, or percutaneous approaches may
be necessary if the steroid injection and bracing do not relieve the symptoms. Endoscopic release avoids
damage to the radial nerve and is the most preferred surgical approach in most cases.  Complications of
surgery include damage to the radial nerve, infection, hypertrophic scarring, or tendon subluxation.
THUMB CMC ARTHRITIS
In order to understand the medical issues concerning CMC thumb conditions, counsel needs to be aware of
the structure of the thumb. As with all five fingers on the hand, the thumb has three joints. The thumb’s
farthest joint from the palm is the one closest to the thumbnail, the one that protrudes when you make a fist
is the second joint, and the third joint is the one that abuts the trapezium bone in the wrist. The carpal-
metacarpal joint refers to the joint that is at the very base of the thumb that articulates with the trapezium.
CMC joint osteoarthritis is a common condition that occurs at the base of the thumb with progressive
degeneration of the cartilage between trapezium and the thumb’s metacarpal base.
This degeneration at the CMC joint at the thumb’s base causes subluxation and symptomatic disability for
people who develop the condition. It is thought that deterioration of the ligaments that attach between the
base of the thumb and the trapezium forms the basis of CMC arthritis. Loosening of the ligaments then
results in the instability of the joint and the base of the thumb resulting in altering of the joint itself and
causing instability and pain.
For people over 50 years of age, the prevalence of CMC thumb osteoarthritis is 8% of men and 25% of
women. There is approximately 36% of post-menopausal women are affected based on x-ray testing and
approximately 20% of all people with CMC osteoarthritis require treatment.
Page 29 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
People with CMC osteoarthritis of the thumb report progressive pain at the base of the thumb, aggravated
by turning, pinching or gripping items. In more severe cases, the base of the thumb protrudes and moves
back and forth relative to the wrist. Many flight attendants develop CMC dysfunction due to the repetitive
pushing and pulling of heavy beverage carts during airline flights. Beverage carts on some airplanes weigh
up to 500 pounds fully loaded and have to be moved through narrow aisles while an airplane is not flying on
a smooth trajectory or when there is turbulence.
There are two provocative tests that an examining physician may administer to confirm the diagnosis of
CMC osteoarthritis in addition to a diagnostic imaging study. The first is called the “axial grind test” which
sounds like it is no fun for someone who has severe CMC pathology. The physician presses down or puts
pressure on the thumb towards the wrist (axial pressure) while rotating the base of the thumb back and
forth. There is the more recent “traction shift test” where the physician pulls the thumb away from the wrist
(also axial but in traction) while alternating subluxation and reduction of the base of the thumb. Pulling a
body part away from a joint is called traction. Either test is positive if the maneuvers cause discomfort. The
traction shift test is 67% sensitive and has almost 100% specificity while the axial grind test has 67%
sensitivity and 30% specificity.
The JAMA literature review indicates that non-surgical treatment include avoiding activities that exacerbate
symptoms, using tools for activities instead of hands, or modifying equipment to decrease stress of joints.
Treatment also includes NSAIDs, immobilization and corticosteriod injections. Interestingly, recent research
indicates that a combination of oral pain medication with diclofenac gel (Voltaren) rubbed on the base of the
thumb significantly reduced pain among 385 patients in a double-blind clinical study. Also, in a 2021 study,
the use of a custom-made short thermoplastic CMC splint was very effective in pain relief and functional
increase.
There is no strong evidence that injections are effective for long-term benefits (steroids, hyaluronic acid
(Orthovisc), saline placebo, and dextrose).
Surgical intervention includes injection of hyaluronic acid, autologous fat injections (from the same patient),
metacarpal wedge osteotomy, arthroscopic debridement, and arthroplasty (includes in the US 90%
surgeries including trapeziectomy alone, trapeziectomy with ligament reconstruction and tendon
interposition); arthrodesis (including joint replacement, joint fusion, and joint denervation). All surgical
strategies have shown efficacy in pain relief and functional improvement.  Complications from surgery has
occurred in 1.3% of patients having an CMC arthroplasty. However, the frequency of complications from
other types of surgery are not well reported. Counsel is directed to AMA Guides Tables 16-18 and 16-27 for
the maximum upper extremity value of the CMC joint and for arthroplasties for upper extremity joints
including the CMC joint.
[17] Other Upper Extremity Injuries—The Elbow
There are a few injuries to the elbow that we see in our cases that need some additional explanation. The most
common conditions we see are medial and lateral epicondylitis and cubital tunnel syndrome, which involves
compression of the ulnar nerve at the elbow. These conditions are not specifically covered in the AMA Guides
but can be evaluated by evaluating nerve involvement and functional loss.
Lateral epicondylitis is also known as “tennis elbow” where there is inflammation and tearing of extensor
tendons for the forearm. Symptoms include pain at the lateral epicondyle that can radiate into the forearm.
Medial epicondylitis, which is also known as “golfer’s elbow,” involves inflammation of the flexor tendons and
muscle group that is attached to the medial epicondyle. Medial epicondylitis can be caused by repetitive
hammering and typing. Surgery for either kind of epicondylitis to remove scar tissue and reattach torn tendons
should only be performed after six to twelve months of unsuccessful conservative treatment with non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, braces and physical therapy exercises.
Cubital tunnel syndrome involves compression of the ulnar nerve at the medial elbow where the nerve travels
across the elbow joint into the forearm. It is a different condition than when the ulnar nerve compression is at
the wrist in the Guyon’s canal. A positive Tinel’s sign at the wrist confirms the ulnar nerve compression at the
Guyon’s canal while an NCV will confirm compression of the ulnar nerve at the elbow if there is slowing of the
ulnar nerve conduction between the elbow and the wrist and a positive Tinel’s sign at the elbow. Symptoms of
Page 30 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
cubital tunnel syndrome include pain at the elbow with numbness and paresthesia along the ulnar distribution
(the pinky, ulnar side of the ring fingers and ulnar side of the hand). The best treatment is wearing a brace at
night and a padded brace during the day along with NSAID medication.
Surgery for cubital tunnel syndrome may be performed where there is an ulnar nerve transposition and the
nerve is freed of scar tissue and is buried in fat or muscle tissue. There is a controversy not only about the
wisdom of performing any surgery on these patients but also when surgery is performed whether the ulnar
nerve should be buried in muscle (now preferred) or fat. Many credible upper extremity physicians will tell you
that surgery only has a 50% success rate and you are better off treating this condition conservatively.
Elbows rarely, if ever, have degenerative osteoarthritis from repetitive work activities and overuse. The only
time osteoarthritis occurs in the elbow joint is when there was a fractured bone involving the elbow joint.
[18] Other Upper Extremity Injuries—The Thumb
DeQuervain’s tenosynovitis involves inflammation of the tendons at the base of back of the thumb. The
condition involves pain at the wrist and thumb and can be caused by repetitive use of the thumb against
resistance such as repetitive use of a computer space bar or mouse. Recently “Blackberry Thumb” has been
emerging that seems to implicate repetitive and daily use of personal communication devices that require use
of the thumbs to tap out emails and text messages. The condition is diagnosed by the Finkelstein test—fold
your thumb on to your palm and close your fingers over the thumb (make a fist around your thumb with the
same hand) and move your wrist towards ulnar deviation (away from your body with your hand facing down). If
this maneuver causes severe pain at the base of the thumb, you may have De Quervain’s tenosynovitis.
Standard treatment for this condition is anti-inflammatory drugs, a thumb spica splint, cortisone injection,
possible surgery, and limitations on the number of emails and text messages you write using your thumbs. Fully
70–80% of cases resolve without surgery. We have seen many cases that involve a combination of carpal
tunnel syndrome, De Quervain’s and cubital tunnel syndrome or epicondylitis, which together cause severe
limitation in gripping and grasping activities. Each of these conditions needs to be treated separately but many
upper extremity specialists will perform surgeries at each of these sites at the same time.
We also see basal carpometacarpal (CMC) arthritis form in the proximal joint of the thumb, where the thumb
meets the wrist. This is usually caused by repetitive use of a computer space bar or overuse of a computer
mouse or in jobs that require forceful repetitive pinching activities. An entire department of mammography
technologists at a major hospital developed CMC arthritis from operating the mammography machine—it takes
numerous gripping and grasping of the positioning plates and adjustments of the machine for up to 40 patients
a day, times two. The pain is severe with movement of the affected thumb(s) and forceful gripping is painful.
Standard treatment is with NSAID medications, thumb spica splinting and if necessary either a resection
arthroplasty (yes, it is rated in Table 16-27) or a fusion of the joint is necessary. Besides mammography
technologists and computer operators, we have seen these cases also include flight attendants (beverage carts
are quite cumbersome, especially the drawers containing the canned drinks).
[19] The Heart and Cardiovascular System
There is a significant amount of misunderstanding about the heart and cardiovascular disease in our cases, and
hopefully you can learn more information here that will assist you in evaluating cases and preparing to cross-
examine physicians. The heart is a muscle that pumps blood throughout the body and consists of four
chambers: two upper chambers called the right and left atrium and two lower chambers called the right and left
ventricles. Oxygenated blood flows into the heart and out the left ventricle to be pumped into the body. The
heart itself has a series of coronary arteries that nourish the heart muscle and a biochemical electrical system
exists that causes the heart to contract and relax.
Blood pressure in the body is determined by how much pressure the heart exerts when it beats and how much
pressure is left when the heart relaxes between beats.
[20] Arrhythmias
Page 31 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
The electrical system of the heart is governed by biochemical reactions that cause the heart to contract and
relax during the course of a heartbeat sequence. Calcium and potassium are essential components for the
electrical system to work properly. One single heart beat consists of five wave segments that are detected by
an ECK or EKG (electrocardiogram)—P, Q, R, S, and T waves. These waves are recorded on graph paper for
a physician to determine whether the waves have normal amplitudes and timing with respect to each other
because abnormalities in these sequences mean there is probably evidence of some sort of heart disease.
For example, a prolonged Q-T segment means there may be evidence of a disorder called “prolonged QT
syndrome” that can cause severe arrhythmia if a person suffers an acute stressful event. Also, a depressed S-T
segment of over 1mm is clinically significant for heart disease and patients who are fine at rest but get severe
shortness of breath with exertion and suffer from severe fatigue on exertion.
Atrial fibrillation occurs when an upper chamber does not beat in sync with the other atrium and with the rest of
the heart. Usually this type of arrhythmia is treated with medication and, if the medication does not work, then
an ablation surgery is performed that stops the biochemical short circuit. People who have atrial fibrillation are
at high risk of having a stroke. Most patients have to take blood thinners such as Coumadin in order to prevent
a stroke as a well as medication to control the fibrillation.
Ventricular fibrillation is a serious and life threatening arrhythmia that requires immediate medical attention.
This is when the lower chamber goes into spasm and stops pumping blood properly. Usually the treatment is
electro-conversion where an external electrical pulse is used to shock the heart into a normal sinus rhythm. For
many arrhythmias, an implanted pacemaker or implanted cardioverter defibrillator is placed internally and
proper heart rhythm is maintained along with blood thinner medication to prevent strokes. Tachycardia means
the heart is beating too fast (generally >100 beats per minute) and bradycardia means the heart is beating too
slowly (<60 bpm). There are arrhythmias called ventricular tachycardia (VT), or ventricular fibrillation (VF), atrial
tachycardia (AT), atrial fibrillation (AF), and atrial flutter.
[21] Coronary Artery Disease
Remember, coronary artery disease (CAD) involves the heart itself while hypertension involves the entire
vascular system, which is why in many cases they are rated separately. You can have a case with three
separate ratable factors: an arrhythmia, coronary artery disease (with a heart attack) under Chapter 3 of the
AMA Guides and a third separate rating for hypertension under Chapter 4 of the Guides.
In 1967, heart by-pass surgery was first performed on a human being successfully. In 1977, balloon angioplasty
was first performed on a human being and in 1987, the first stents were implanted to open arteries that were
occluded from plaque formation.
A heart attack, called a myocardial infarction (MI), occurs when a piece of plaque tears off from a coronary
artery wall and lodges in place, blocking blood flow in the artery and depriving the heart muscle of oxygen.
When that occurs, the heart muscle wall deteriorates and loses its elasticity. Contrary to popular belief, most
heart attacks occur when an artery is only partially blocked—only 40–60% occlusion—and a piece of plaque
breaks off and travels to a point where blood flow suddenly stops within the artery. This is why in many cases
the literature supports the notion that a heated argument with a co-worker or sudden heavy lifting or exertion
can trigger a heart attack. There is also what is called a “catecholamine induced myocardial infarction” in which
significant emotional stress can trigger a heart attack.
Catecholamines are amines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) that trigger our “fight or flight” instincts—causing
increases in blood levels of adrenaline, raised blood pressure, vascoconstriction, bronchodilation, and
increased heart rate. Do not discount cases when a patient has 90–100% occlusion of a coronary artery—that
is a very serious problem that needs to be addressed, especially if there are any symptoms such as chest
pains, fatigue and difficulty with exertional activities.
There are two tests that are the standard of care to determine whether in fact a person has had a heart attack.
They are the protein markers of troponin and CPK that show whether there is any heart wall damage due to a
heart attack. Normal troponin levels are between 0.0 and 0.18. Anything higher than that is suspicious for an
MI. Any patient who presents with chest pains, shortness of breath and diaphoresis (extreme sweating) is
probably having a heart attack and immediate emergency medical attention is needed.
Page 32 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
In fact a recent case involved an employee who had a toe-to-toe argument with a co-worker, who later the
same day developed these symptoms and drove himself to a hospital. His troponin test was at 2.0, and when
repeated three hours later, was at 1.75. His ECG was normal but the ultrasound of his heart revealed some
inferior to posterior hypokinesis of his heart wall, which confirmed heart damage from this episode. The AME in
the case originally opined that the employee did not have a heart attack but when confronted with these study
results from the attending hospital, it was confirmed that in fact the injured worker did have an MI, in fact a
serious one, despite the normal ECG.
In many heart attacks, an electrocardiogram (ECG) or (EKG) will show abnormalities suggestive of a
myocardial infarction. If you see a case where an ECG show a 1mm or more S-T segment depression, that is a
sign of heart damage to the heart’s electrical system. However, in other cases, there may not be any ECG
abnormalities but there is evidence of heart wall damage from these blood tests. In addition, an ultrasound of
the heart will show heart wall “hypokinesis,” which means that the wall is moving slower than it should be as a
result of the heart wall damage from an MI.
As you can see, you need to become aware of the tests, test results and laboratory findings in these cases, and
you need to pay attention to blood tests, ECG results and ultrasound studies in order to properly and
completely diagnose heart problems and impairments arising from them. The cross examination of the AME in
the example above was gleaned from the attending hospital records and discharge summary that showed the
injured worker did in fact have a heart attack.
Once a person has had a heart attack, usually they are prescribed aspirin and a blood thinner such as
Coumadin® or Plavix® in order to prevent a stroke or repeat MI. In fact, recent research shows that a
combination of baby aspirin (81 mg) with Plavix has a greater cardio-protective effect than either drug by itself.
However, as stated earlier in this guidebook, all medication has side effects and all medications can cause
adverse effects. People who take Plavix, Coumadin or aspirin are at risk of bleeding, easy bruising and difficulty
healing from lacerations. An additional impairment rating caused by these blood thinner therapies is justified—
up to a 10% WPI, based on the text in Chapter 9, section 9.5, page 203, second column, of the AMA Guides.
Coronary arteries can get clogged with plaque causing a heart attack. Usually coronary bypass surgery is
needed if an occlusion is greater than 90% and stenting is impossible to restore blood flow to the heart. In
cases that involve coronary bypass surgery, traditionally the surgeon would use veins from the patient’s leg
since there are redundant blood flow routes in the legs. However, recent advances in bypass surgery disfavor
using veins at all as a bypass graft. The reason is that veins do not have the same elasticity as arteries and
veins tend to also clog five to ten years after a bypass operation, necessitating a repeat bypass surgery.
Currently, one of two mammary arteries is used as the by-pass graft, which allows use of existing arterial
vessels to serve as a bypass around a clogged coronary artery.
In a recent case, a police officer had triple coronary bypass surgery and suffered a total organ failure during the
surgery—his liver and kidneys shut down. Miraculously, the physicians saved the injured worker’s life. Three
years later, the injured worker was examined by an AME in internal medicine whose report was fine except for
his laboratory studies appended at the end of his report. In the laboratory report, the AME missed the fact that
there were liver abnormalities in the blood work.
At the AME’s deposition the physician acknowledged the fact of the abnormal liver functions and attributed
them to the total organ failure from the heart bypass surgery from three years before. The liver function
abnormalities resulted in an additional 10% WPI rating under Table 6-7 of the AMA Guides, which resulted in a
life pension case when this rating was combined with those for hypertension and heart disease. This type of
case reminds you that you must pay close attention to laboratory results attached to an AME or QME report
since many abnormalities in blood and urine studies are ratable under the AMA Guides.
[22] Hypertension
Hypertension can cause severe medical conditions and complications, especially when it is not treated or if it is
not treated correctly. Patients who are hypertensive are at significant risk for stroke, heart attacks, heart failure,
eye damage, kidney damage, and coronary artery disease.
As stated above, a person’s blood pressure is determined by the amount of pressure exerted by a heart
contraction and the pressure remaining when the heart relaxes between beats. The higher number in a blood
Page 33 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
pressure reading is the pressure when the heart contracts (systolic), and the lower number in the reading is the
pressure when the heart relaxes (diastolic). Normal blood pressure is less than 120/80, based on the American
Heart Association hypertension guidelines that were approved in November 2017.
Blood pressure is checked using a sphygmomanometer (try pronouncing it; if you can’t, call it a blood pressure
cuff). A manual blood pressure cuff test is more accurate than the digital ones since a physician or nurse will be
able to tell when the systolic and diastolic readings occur. The digital models are fine after an initial test
because sometimes the first test is not accurate due to resistance by the patient’s arm against the digital
readout—the first reading is usually artificially high. If you get a high reading on either a manual or digital
machine, the physician should always repeat the test to be sure there is an accurate reading.
For a diagnosis of hypertension, the systolic, diastolic or both need to be abnormal for at least two readings at
two different days. The 18th edition of the Merck Manual® states on page 606 that there has to be at least three
high readings at three different days. The standard has changed since the 18th edition of the Merck Manual®
was updated in 2006. In the AMA Guides, Table 4-1 includes the classification of hypertension in adults and
utilizes the criteria for diagnosis from the sixth report (1997) Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection,
and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. In any case, if a patient has at least two readings at two different days
of 140–159 systolic OR 90–99 diastolic, then the patient has a stage 1 hypertension. Stage 2 hypertension
exists if the systolic is greater than or equal to 160 OR the diastolic is greater than or equal to 100. Stage 3
hypertension occurs when the systolic is greater than or equal to 180 OR the diastolic is greater than or equal
to 110.
However, the Joint National Committee issued its seventh report in 2007 and changed the criteria somewhat.
The diagnostic criteria for hypertension is still the same—two separate readings of systolic and diastolic that are
equal to or greater than 140/90 requires the diagnosis of hypertension. There is no longer a “stage 2”
classification of hypertension. This is because any reading at or above 160/100 is very serious evidence of
severe hypertension or malignant hypertension, whether or not the patient is on anti-hypertensive medications.
Arguably, if any WPI rating in Table 4-2 is based on the difference between Class 2 and Class 3 because of the
difference between stage 1 and stage 2 hypertension, that is now a distinction without a difference, and under
the current JNC criteria, a person with stage 2 hypertension could fit into a Class 3 WPI rating. The publication
Archives of Internal Medicine routinely updates the current diagnostic and treatment criteria for hypertension
and cardio-vascular hypertensive disease.
The newest guidelines for the diagnosis of hypertension is from the American Heart Association. Counsel
should become aware of the AHA standards since they are widely accepted and utilized for treatment for
hypertension related conditions. The current AHA Guidelines as of November 2017 are as follows:
BLOOD PRESSURE
CATEGORY:
SYSTOLIC
(mmHG)
and/
or
DIASTOLIC
(mmHG)
NORMAL
<120
and
<80
ELEVATED
120–129 mm
and
<80
HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE HTN-
STAGE 1
130–139
or
80–89
HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE HTN-
STAGE 2
140 or
HIGHER
or
90 or higher
HYPERTENSIVE
CRISIS
180 or
HIGHER
and/
or
120 or
higher
Malignant hypertension is diagnosed when a patient has extremely high blood pressure readings and
medication is not effective in reducing it. These people are the most at risk of suffering a hypertension induced
stroke.
If blood pressure is measured in both arms, the highest value is used. Coronary artery disease is the most
common cause of death for people who have treated hypertension. Ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke is a
common complication of untreated hypertension.
Page 34 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
The variety of drug treatment for hypertension is significant. In most cases of hypertension, medication has to
be taken for the remainder of the life of the patient. There are diuretics (“-thiazides” such as HCTZ), beta-
blockers (drugs ending in “-olol”), calcium channel blockers (drugs ending in “-pine”), ACE inhibitors (drugs
ending in “-pril”), and angiotensin II receptor blockers (drugs ending in “-artan”). See page 610 of the Merck
Manual®. Virtually all of these drugs have side effects, some of which can be rated under the AMA Guides
separately from the hypertension itself. For example, most of these medications cause reduced libido; diuretics
cause urinary frequency. About two-thirds of the population in the United States who have been diagnosed with
hypertension do not comply with their medication requirements and the hypertension remains out of control.
If hypertension has not been diagnosed, or treatment is inadequate or ineffective, a patient can develop left
ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), or enlargement of the lower left chamber of the heart. Image yourself lifting a 15-
pound barbell with your left hand for one hour per day for a year and not doing any exercises with your right
arm at all for the same year. Your left biceps muscle will be much larger than your right one. The circumference
of your left arm will be greater than that of the right arm. This is exactly what happens to the left ventricle of the
heart if there is uncontrolled hypertension for between three and five years—the heart has to work harder and
pump harder in order to push blood into the body from the left ventricle.
LVH is a form of cardiomyopathy—enlargement of the heart—which over time causes congestive heart failure
(CHF in the AMA Guides). Congestive heart failure means that the heart does not pump hard enough to move
the blood through the body, causing a buildup in fluids in the legs (edema), regurgitation (backflow) of blood
through heart values and severe shortness of breath, fatigue, fainting, and chest pain.
Left ventricular hypertrophy is diagnosed by an echocardiogram and shows thickening in the lining of the heart
muscle of the left ventricle. Once hypertension has affected the left ventricle, the AMA Guides mandates a
Class 3 or Class 4 impairment rating under Chapter 4, Table 4-2 which is 30%–49% WPI or 50%–100% WPI,
respectively. In most cases, the final WPI rating is based on the combination of factors from the hypertension
and from the LVH together under Chapter 3 of the AMA Guides.
However, in safety member cases (firefighters and law enforcement), a heart trouble presumption applies under
Labor Code § 3212 et seq. but does not apply to hypertension itself. The same goes for apportionment—Labor
Code § 4663(e) mandates that there is no apportionment in safety member cases for heart trouble but probably
does for hypertension. So what happens if hypertension causes the heart trouble? Left ventricular hypertrophy
can be rated independently under Chapter 3, Cardiomyopathy, Table 3-9 and hypertension rated under Tables
4-1 and 4-2 in Chapter 4 of the AMA Guides. Otherwise, if only Table 4-2 is used for both the hypertension and
the LVH, the physician will have to parcel out what apportionment, if any, exists for the hypertension and none
for the heart trouble. You can see how problematic these cases can become.
[23] Strokes
There are basically three types of strokes—ischemic, hemorrhagic, and transient ischemic attacks (if the stroke
symptoms last less than one hour). Generally, a stroke is a sudden, localized interruption of cerebral blood flow
that causes neurologic deficits. People with hypertension, diabetes, cardiac valve disease, atrial fibrillation,
alcoholism, old age, family history, smoking history, use of cocaine or amphetamines, and deep vein
thrombosis (DVT) are at risk of having a stroke.
An ischemic stroke happens when a blockage occurs in a major artery in the brain due to either a thrombosis or
embolism. Remember, “ischemia” means “narrowing.” The stroke is confirmed by MRI or CT scan and sudden
neurologic deficits occur for more than one hour. “Neurologic deficits” include but are not limited to severe
headache, slurred speech, temporary loss of vision in one eye, facial paralysis, one-sided upper or lower
extremity (or both) paralysis, loss of memory (short term is lost before long term memory is lost), and loss of
information processing (cognitive deficits) such as dysphasia, aphasia, and behavioral impairments (such as
depression, disinhibition, or increase in aggressive behavior).
A thrombosis is a blood clot that forms within a blood vessel (either artery or vein), breaks away and enters the
brain through an artery causing blockage of blood flow. An embolism is a sudden blockage of blood flow in a
blood vessel caused by an abnormal particle in the blood stream, usually a bubble of air (such as nitrogen from
Page 35 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
the “bends”), or any foreign substance that makes its way into the brain blocking blood flow. In either a
thrombosis or embolism, brain tissue dies due to the lack of blood flow causing neurologic deficits. An ischemic
stroke accounts for 80% of all strokes.
The standard of care for any ischemic stroke is to restore blood flow where a blockage has occurred. The “clot
buster” drug, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), must be given to an ischemic stroke victim within three hours
of symptom onset. Some recent research is calling for extending the avenue of opportunity to four hours, but a
certain number of patients are at risk of dying from the clot buster medication if it is administered more than
three hours after symptom onset.
A hemorrhagic stroke, which accounts for 20% of all strokes, occurs when a blood vessel in the brain bursts or
ruptures causing blood to flow in the brain. This can occur intracerebral (inside the brain) or subarachnoid
(between the brain and the cover of the brain). With all ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes, there is brain tissue
damage caused by the lack of oxygen, which is caused by a blockage in an artery, by bleeding in the brain or
by increased intracranial pressure. Examples of the cause of a hemorrhagic stroke include subdural hematoma
or a ruptured cerebral aneurism. Usually the cause of a hemorrhagic stroke is hypertension, and diagnosis is
confirmed by CT scan only. For obvious reasons, the clot buster drug tPA cannot be given to a patient who is
having a hemorrhagic stroke. In these patients, stopping the intracranial bleed and lowering blood pressure are
the goals of treatment.
The actual neurologic symptoms caused by either an ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke depend on what location
of the brain the blockage, bleed, or pressure occurs.
A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is sometimes called, in layman terms, a “mini-stroke” and is a warning to a
patient that he or she is at risk of having an ischemic stroke. In most TIA patients, there is no brain damage
from the TIA and if there is, it is not as extensive as in an ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke. Most TIAs are
caused by an embolism, and symptoms last less than one hour. Usually the main neurologic deficit from a TIA
is monocular blindness that lasts less than five minutes.
Can a stroke be industrially related? If a person develops a thrombosis or embolism as a result of an industrial
injury and an ischemic stroke occurs, then the stroke can be considered work related. Similarly, if a patient’s
hypertension or hypertension related conditions are work related and a hemorrhagic stroke occurs, the stroke
may be work related. Certainly, acute or chronic emotional stress may cause an increase in blood pressure that
can trigger a stroke. So a very thorough medical history and diagnosis may reasonably result in any kind of
stroke being work related if a work injury is a contributing factor to the cause of a stroke or TIA.
[24] Concussions—Traumatic Brain Injuries
We see closed-head injuries in automobile accidents, construction injuries and even in slip and fall injuries
when the injured party strikes his or her head. Contrary to popular belief, you do not need to have a skull
fracture in order for there to be a serious concussion. The brain is floating inside the arachnoid covering with
cerebral spinal fluid supporting it. The central nervous system consists of the brain and spinal cord, and you
have 150cc of cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) at any given moment that surrounds the brain and spinal cord, with
your body making about 400–500cc of CSF per 24-hour day. In the event of a head trauma, the brain violently
strikes the inside of the skull causing bruising of brain tissue as well as potential bleeding if vascular structures
are involved.
In many cases, we will see what is called a contra-coup brain injury in which the area of the brain that is
opposite where a trauma strikes the head gets the brain damage. For example, there is a case where the
injured worker slips and falls backwards, striking the back of his head on a tile floor. The brain damage
occurred in the left frontal area of the cortex because the damaged area was more sensitive from trauma than
the back of the head where the actual external trauma occurred. In this case, there was blood vessel trauma in
the left frontal lobe, and actual brain tissue died from lack of blood flow.
Generally speaking, when there is a head trauma, in the absence of loss of consciousness, there is no brain
damage and symptoms from the head injury resolve in a short amount of time. Whenever there is a loss of
consciousness, there is always some brain damage from the trauma, at least some bruising of brain tissue.
Symptoms from traumatic brain injury (TBI) or post concussion syndrome cases include headaches, nausea,
vomiting, dizziness, vertigo, sensitivity to bright lights, confusion, disinhibition (doing or saying bad things you
Page 36 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
didn’t mean to do or say that are socially unacceptable), memory loss, disorientation (altered consciousness),
and difficulty with speech. These symptoms are similar to what we see in stroke cases.
The bottom line in any TBI case, or stroke case for that matter, is to have medical assessments by both a
neurologist and neuropsychologist (and internal medicine for stroke cases). A neurologist can assess the actual
organic brain damage that is caused directly by the stroke or TBI. The neuropsychologist can administer the
proper nationally accepted neuropsychological testing that determines any long-term or permanent cognitive
and behavioral impairment of function that are caused by a stroke or TBI. The AMA Guides require
assessments by both specialists in determining permanent impairment under Chapter 13. Every neurologist will
tell you that he or she is not qualified to evaluate cognitive and behavioral deficits in these patients and only a
neuropsychologist specially trained in evaluating cognitive impairments is qualified to do such testing. A regular
psychologist who we regularly see in our psyche cases is not qualified to evaluate TBI and stroke victims.
Recent research has shown that repeated head traumas cause a logrythmic increase in signs, symptoms, and
complaints over time to a point where irreversible dementia can occur. This is becoming evident in professional
sports, such as boxing and football, and has led to additional regulations in those sports to try and minimize
repeated head traumas.
[25] Diabetes
For a thorough discussion about diabetes, its pathophysiology, diagnosis, prognosis and whether the condition
can be work related, see Ch. 3, § 3.10 of this guidebook. The additional information you need to be aware of
here is that the hemoglobin HbA1c blood test is a fairly new diabetes test that is now being used to determine
how well a person’s blood sugar has been under control, if at all, over the 90-day period prior to the date of the
test. Generally, this glycemic index test evaluates how much sugar is attached to red blood cells. Originally, a
reading of <7% was considered normal but the current desired reading is <6%. So now, endocrinologists have
two significant tests in their arsenal—the standard fasting blood sugar testing and the A1c 90-day testing.
[26] Opiate Addiction and Dependency
[a] Opioids and Workers’ Compensation
It is unfortunate to have to discuss this issue in a reference handbook on workers’ compensation, but the
reality is that many injured workers end up going down this street. As indicated above, it costs only $252.00
for a 90-day supply of 750 mg Vicodin®, taken four times a day by a patient who claims to have a chronic
pain syndrome. The following medications are pain reducers that are opiate based (referred to in the
literature as “opioid based analgesics”): Vicodin® (hydrocodone), Oxycontin®, MS Contin®, morphine,
hydromorphone (Opana®), fentanyl, Lortabs®, Norco®, “Tylenol with Codeine” (APC), codeine, Darvocet®,
Percocet®, and methadone to name a few. In layman terms, these drugs are basically morphine derivatives
with either acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or ibuprofen (Motrin® or Advil®) thrown in.
Virtually every drug that exists in the world has what are called “adverse effects.” This means that when a
person takes a certain drug, there are additional symptoms or side effects that can emerge from taking the
drug itself. This is why in every case when the FDA approves a drug, the benefits of the drug must
outweigh the risks of taking it. This is true of simple over the counter drugs, such as aspirin. Did you know
that scientists do not understand the biomechanics of why aspirin lowers fevers? We do know that aspirin
can cause bleeding ulcers in the gastrointestinal system and can cause Reyes Syndrome in children. But it
is truly a remarkable drug for most of us. So every medication has side effects.
The rule of thumb is that if an injured worker is taking more than four opiate based pills a day for non-
surgical or chronic pain, then that patient may be showing signs of opiate dependency and tolerance. The
FDA originally approved these products for acute pain from an injury or surgery. The intent was that the
patient would receive a 30-day supply at most for either the acute injury such as a broken bone, or for post-
surgical pain relief, along with a non-narcotic anti-inflammatory drug. This is a very controversial issue since
some patients benefit from four different opiate based medications as part of their treatment protocol. It is
Page 37 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
when the dosages have to increase to provide the same analgesic effect or when the patient is shopping
around for more opiate based medications outside the pain management arena does a problem begin.
The economics of medicine has emerged and physicians discovered a powerful tool—prescribe these
drugs for any patient who complains of severe intractable pain and the pain goes away and the physician
has a quick turn-around of patients and the patients are happy to once again become functional, despite
bouts of severe pain when the drugs wear off.
Unfortunately, many of the patients developed a dependency on the medication in order to function with
simple ADLs and work. Also, many patients concurrently develop tolerance—they need stronger medication
or increased dosages to achieve the same analgesic effect from smaller dosages with which they started.
So a vicious circle emerges—dependency and tolerance.
The FDA recently has adopted additional warnings on products that contain opiates for pain relief. The first
additional warning is for patients who take these opioid analgesic drugs is that they should not also
concurrently take over the counter Tylenol or ibuprofen because the opiate based drugs sometimes
contains one of those substances. For example, Vicodin® already contains a hefty dose of Tylenol, and
patients who also take the over the counter acetaminophen are unwittingly taking up to 3000 mg or more of
the drug. High dosages of either acetaminophen or ibuprofen can lead to toxic blood levels and damage the
liver, kidneys or both. There have been workers’ compensation cases in which a ratable impairment occurs
due to permanent damage to the liver from long-term use of these over the counter drugs combined with
prescribed pain relievers that are opiate based.
The second warning that has yet to be mandated by the FDA, but may occur soon for good reason, is to
limit prescriptions for these opiate based drugs in non-terminal illness cases for a 30-day supply for acute
injuries and another 30-day supply for post surgical pain. This is because of the large number of iatrogenic
addictions that have been occurring due to over-prescribing of these drugs and due to drug diversions.
Drug diversions is a fancy term for having these drugs develop a street market value, and they are diverted
from clinical use for legitimate medical purposes to drug dealing on the street. For example, OxyContin® is
a form of extended release of synthetic opiate and can be sold on the street to be ground up and ingested
nasally or injected, producing similar effects as ingestion of a heroin fix.
Side effects from long-term opiate use can be extensive and in some cases, permanent. They include
dependency and tolerance as stated above, sleep disturbance, drowsiness, dry mouth, constipation,
headaches, decreased libido, erectile dysfunction and dental loss due to xerostomia (loss of saliva—dry
mouth). In fact, there are rare cases where the dosages of opiates are so high and for such a long-term
period that the patient develops a bowel obstruction directly as a result of the long-term opiate use and
chronic constipation that a bowel resection surgery is necessary to save the patient’s life. All of this started
in one case as a simple carpal tunnel surgery that went badly, resulting in a confirmed case of CRPS.
Remember, if a subsequent industrially caused pathology becomes independent of an original industrially
related pathology, then the subsequent one is independently rated under the AMA Guides. So the
subsequent drug-related bowel obstruction and surgery resulted in an independent WPI rating under AMA
Guides, Chapter 6, The Digestive System, even though the original rating was for the carpal tunnel
syndrome and CRPS.
In our cases that involve chronic use of opiate medications, the red flag for everyone—physicians,
attorneys, claims examiners, and judges—is to watch out for any injured worker who is using over four pills
from one or more prescriptions that contain opiates per day more than thirty days after an acute injury or
surgery. Also be concerned if an injured worker is seeking medication from multiple sources other than from
just a primary treating physician—through a dentist, primary care physician, emergency room visits or
urgent care facility visits. This is a sure bet that there is a problem with overuse of these drugs. Either the
injured worker is taking too many of them or is diverting them.
The problem is that control over chronic opiate use must be supervised by a physician who knows how to
treat the overuse of these drugs. In most of our cases, many so-called “pain management” physicians are
not accomplishing pain management but are instead turning injured workers into zombies by over
prescribing narcotic medications as stated above. The problem is that when the patient has been
consistently taking opiate based medications, and the dosage is drastically and suddenly reduced or
Page 38 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
stopped completely, he or she will go into “withdrawal,” having symptoms similar to a heroin addict who
cannot get a “fix,” with sweating, chills, irritability, aggressive behavior and other visceral reactions. People
who become dependent on these narcotics must be weaned off of them gradually and under a great deal of
medical and supportive supervision.
This discussion leads us to the reason for this section in the first place. When a physician routinely
prescribes opiate based narcotic medications, it is probable that utilization reviews will deny or modify
repeated refills of these drugs. This sets off a chain of predictable events—the injured worker seeks the
medication from any source, including outside the workers’ compensation system if necessary, and also
insists that his or her attorney seek the assistance of a judge at the WCAB to obtain enforcement of his or
her physician’s prescriptions for these drugs. So the role of the attorney and judge in these situations
become significant. Attorneys who represent injured workers may choose to refuse to promote or enable a
client’s addiction and dependency on opiate based narcotic medications. Some applicant’s attorneys refuse
to file a Declaration of Readiness to Proceed to an Expedited Hearing to obtain judicial assistance in getting
these prescriptions filled after a utilization review denial or modification. Other attorneys unwittingly promote
narcotic addictions by injured workers by going to the WCAB District Office and seeking judicial action to
enforce prescriptions for these medications that are being denied under utilization review. Judges are
caught in the middle by weighing the evidence on whether or not to allow these medications to be
continuously prescribed under the guise of “pain management” when, in fact, true pain management means
weaning people off of these drugs completely.
The bottom line is that attorneys and judges are actively involved in the treatment of injured workers in
these cases. Any legal action involving questions about whether or not to allow injured workers to continue
receiving these drugs outside 30 days from the date of surgery or an acute injury should include
compassionate continued use of these narcotics with the goal of weaning the injured worker off of them in a
closely medically supervised manner. We have seen judges actually take over monitoring exactly the type
and amount of opiate medications are being taken per day or week by injured workers.
In appropriate cases, formal detoxification from these drugs with in-patient hospitalization may be
necessary. In one recent case, the dental bill that resulted from xerostomia due to chronic opiate use was
$60,000.00. In another case, a three month in-patient detoxification program cost an insurance company
close to $120,000.00. Believe it or not, successful treatment in these cases saved the employer’s insurance
companies significant money in the long run and definitely saved the injured worker’s life. Sometimes
detoxification programs are unsuccessful. In one case, the applicant hanged himself to death after two
unsuccessful in-patient detoxification programs where he could not handle low back pain after many years
of opiate dependency and he had been denied continued access to them.
Narcotic addiction and dependency are real, difficult conditions to treat, and successful detoxification from
these drugs may require more aggressive action by workers’ compensation judges and physicians who
treat these patients. Behavioral contracts that injured workers sign not to divert medication or to doctor
shop for medication should be enforced. Experience shows that just getting some of these injured workers
off all medications is the best possible treatment for them.
Narcotic addiction and dependency have now become a national issue. In fact, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention issued a preliminary report in 2011 that says more people died because of drug
related causes than from motor vehicle accidents in 2009. At the time of publication of this guidebook, the
CDC has analyzed 96% of death certificates from 2000 through 2009. This is the first time drug related
deaths exceeded traffic accident deaths since drug related deaths were tracked by the government
beginning in 1979. The main culprits are pain medications and tranquilizers that are used together or with
alcohol. Pain medications and anti-anxiety medications are the most highly addictive drugs on the market.
The specific drugs that are linked to the drug related deaths are OxyContin, Vicodin, Xanax, Valium, and
Soma. The newest drug added to the list by the CDC is Fentanyl, which is 100 times stronger than
morphine. These drugs cause more deaths than cocaine and heroin combined. The 2009 data, which is the
most recent from the CDC, indicates the most abused drug of all is hydrocodone, which is Vicodin. From
2000 through 2008, drug induced deaths tripled for people between the ages of 50 to 69, while the most
deaths occurred for people in their 40s. More importantly, drug related deaths have doubled in the last 10
years. Workers’ compensation patients are no exception, and counsel who represents injured workers
Page 39 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
should think twice about going to the WCAB to ask a judge for an order requiring the filling of prescriptions
for these drugs.
[b] The Grand Debate Over Opioids
[i] Introduction
We hate statistics but policymakers can’t live without them. For example, 100 million residents of the
United States have chronic pain according to a 2011 report from the Institute of Medicine. Pain is
considered by some physicians as the fifth vital sign (blood pressure, respiration, temperature, and
heart rate are the other four). There are four categories of pain duration that a medical physician is
obligated to treat—acute (one month), sub-acute (two to three months), chronic (more than three
months), and post-operative.
The widespread use of opioid medications for treatment of pain did not begin until the late 1980s when
long-acting opioids were found to be effective for non-cancer pain, with less than 1% of patients
becoming addicted to them. Pharmaceutical companies conducted “research” showing the efficacy of
long acting opioids in studies that lasted no longer than three months. This opened up Pandora’s box
and by 2010, there were 16,000 deaths nationwide from opioid related overdoses according to the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
In response to the epidemic of opioid use and misuse, policymakers are demanding action—not by the
FDA—but by state regulators and the payer community who are imposing medical treatment guidelines
on prescribing physicians. There is no national consensus of what those guidelines should be. In fact,
Medicare has a “Y” symbol by just about every known opioid medication including fentanyl lollipops,
oxycontin (oxycodone), dilaudid (hydromorphone), and MS Contin. In Medicare parlance, a “Y” means
the medication, device, or procedure is a “yes” and is reimbursed under the Medicare program.
Despite the deaths due to opioid overdoses, many chronic pain patients are able to live normal lives,
including having the ability to work, while on dosages of opioid medication that would kill someone who
is “opioid naïve” who has never taken any opioid based drug. In fact, many elderly patients are on long
acting opioid medication for chronic severe arthritis and other pain generators and are able to function
with very active lifestyles.
[ii] California Workers’ Compensation System Response
How does all of this play out in the California workers’ compensation system? There is a movement
afoot to specifically reduce the use of opioid medication in work related injury cases. “Dueling” medical
treatment guidelines exist that are based on so-called “evidence based medicine” but whose terms defy
any logic since all are based on different standards of medical care. If you have an opinion, you can
find a study that supports your position. Curiously, Medicare itself does not have any clear cut medical
treatment guidelines for prescribing opioid medications. That decision making is left to each prescribing
physician and community standards of medical care, which means that treatment is individualized to
each patient’s needs and is not subject to anyone’s guidelines.
More specifically, state workers’ compensation systems, including California, Washington, Utah, and
Texas, as well as the Veterans Administration, use ACOEM, ODG, or their own guidelines for the
authorization of opioid use in acute, sub-acute, chronic, and post-operative durations of treatment.
Those guidelines are evolving as we enter 2015. In March 2014, the Administrative Director of the
California Division of Workers’ Compensation proposed new opioid prescribing guidelines that
incorporated some of the guidelines reflected in all of the resources mentioned above. In December
2014, the Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, ACOEM’s publication, issued its newly
revised opioid prescription guidelines in a white paper that ACOEM claims is based on evidence based
medicine with an emphasis on weighted studies found in medical literature [see Hegmann et al.,
“ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative
Pain,” JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)].
Page 40 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
[iii] Understanding Morphine Equivalent Dose
The centerpiece of each separate guideline mentioned above revolves around what “morphine
equivalent dose (MED)” is acceptable on a daily basis for treatment of acute, sub-acute, chronic, and
post-operative pain. For the purpose of this article, a typical morphine equivalent daily dose is 30 mg
morphine oral medication every 4-6 hours, which is equal to 120 mg to 180 mg per day of morphine or
its equivalent. For example, the morphine equivalent dose of dilaudid is 7.5 mg for every 30 mg of
morphine so the MED of dilaudid would be 30-45 mg per day.
Many treatment guidelines in conventional medicine allow for up to 120 mg MED per day before a “red
flag” appears and a specialist is required to be involved in the prescribing process. There is no
consensus in medicine exactly what the MED should be for any given patient since there is so much
variability between patients, the precipitating pain condition, and how each patient reacts to different
formulations of opioid-based pain medication.
The California Medical Board proposed in 2014 that the maximum MED dosage should not exceed 80
mg per day without a red flag. The ODG Guidelines recommend no more than 80 mg per day MED.
The DWC Medical Director is leaning towards an MED ceiling of 50 mg per day, which is currently
recommended under the ACOEM guidelines discussed below. In addition, ACOEM, ODG, and the
DWC proposed guidelines include an annual attempt to completely wean patients off opioids all
together. The weaning attempts have become compulsory and are part and parcel of the utilization
review process that is mandated in Labor Code § 4610.
These guidelines contrast with the typical scenario in a physician’s office which treats injured workers
under the California workers’ compensation system. Up until the time utilization reviews were mandated
in 2004 under Labor Code § 4610, everyone would “win” with prescriptions for opioid medications. A
90-day supply of Vicodin ES (hydrocodone with acetaminophen) provides a patient with four tablets a
day for 90 days at a cost of about $68.00. A doctor visit to obtain a prescription for the 90 days is about
$98.32 for a specialist under the OMFS. Parenthetically, Medicare has a new requirement that a
prescription for all Schedule II narcotics be issued by the prescribing physician every 30 days via office
visits since the FDA in 2014 changed opioids from a Schedule III to a Schedule II narcotic.
So for under $200.00 every three months, everyone “wins.” The injured worker gets pain relief from
opioid therapy to the tune of 120 mg to 180 mg MED per day, the doctor can see hundreds of patients
at $98.32 per ten minute office visit for each patient, and each employer’s claims administrator pays
$800.00 a year per injured worker for “pain management.” Everyone is happy until the injured worker
becomes dependent on the opioids or suffers from the side effects of long term opioid use. So now in
2015, the pendulum is swinging the other way, big time.
[iv] ACOEM Practice Guidelines for Opioids
The ACOEM white paper pre-amble states: “All treatment recommendations are guidance based on
synthesis of the evidence plus expert consensus. These are recommendations for practitioners, and
decisions to adopt a particular course of action must be made by trained practitioners on the basis of
available resources and the particular circumstances presented by the individual patient” [see
Hegmann et al., “ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and
Post-Operative Pain,” p. e144, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)]. This quote should be part of the
actual ACOEM or DWC regulatory guideline since so many times, opioid treatment is denied, delayed,
or ended based on utilization reviews that take the average patient into account and do not account for
individual variation.
In fairness to ACOEM, its 2015 opioid treatment guidelines are based on a review of 264,617 articles
on pain studies, with 263 actual studies with 157 deemed of high or moderate quality [see Hegmann et
al., “ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-
Operative Pain,” p. e144, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)]. The white paper does not identify how
many of the articles or studies were conducted at the university level (usually of higher quality), how
many were supported by the payer community (such as workers’ compensation payers, of questionable
Page 41 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
research quality), or how many were industry supported (usually by pharmaceutical companies, also of
questionable quality).
The medical director of the California DWC has not formally adopted the March 2014 proposed Opioid
Treatment Guidelines, probably because she was expecting the ACOEM white paper to be issued by
the end of 2014. It stands to reason, though, that since the California MTUS adopts ACOEM guidelines
for most treatment modalities, California would also be able to simply adopt the new ACOEM opioid
treatment guidelines.
Here is a synopsis of the ACOEM opioid guidelines:
Acute pain (up to 4 weeks) [see Hegmann et al., “ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment
of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative Pain,” p. e145, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)]:
• There must be a comprehensive history and physical exam
• Acute, severe pain from trauma uncontrolled by other agents and/or functional deficits caused by
pain
• Schedule IV opioid is ok if allergy to NSAID or Tylenol; or if nothing else works
• Recommend to taper off opioid after 2 weeks
• More detailed screening of patient if opioids are prescribed over 2 weeks, especially in cases of
severe pain with no objective findings
• Maximum daily oral dose for opioid-naïve patients who have severe acute pain is 50 mg MED;
use lowest possible dose
• Discontinue opioids for patient who have “meaningful functional recovery”
• Opioid naïve patients with functional recovery do not need to be tapered off
• Patients with acute pain who are on greater than 50 mg per day MED for over 3 weeks need to be
tapered over 3 to 7 days
• Transition patients to NSAID or Tylenol, or nothing at all after ending opioids
• Opioids are not recommended for patients who perform safety sensitive jobs
• Routine opioid use for “nonsevere acute pain” such as low back sprains or injuries with no tissue
damage are not recommended
Post-Operative Pain (up to 4 weeks) [see Hegmann et al., “ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids for
Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative Pain,” p. e145, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec.
2014)]:
• Same as for acute pain, plus:
• Limited use of opioids as adjunctive (“along with something else”) therapy to more effective
treatments
• Closely screen patients who need opioids more than two weeks post surgically
Sub-Acute (1 to 3 months) and Chronic Pain (greater than 3 months) [see Hegmann et al., “ACOEM
Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative Pain,” pp.
e145–e146, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)]:
• Have the same guidelines
• Comprehensive history and physical
• Screening of patients before initiating a trial of opioids
• Use of an opioid trial if other evidence-based approaches for functional restorative pain therapy
have been used with inadequate improvement in function
Page 42 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
• Opioids are then recommended for treatment of function impaired by sub-acute or chronic severe
pain (e.g. inability to work because of any of the following: chronic severe radiculopathy,
chronic severe peripheral neuropathies, complex regional pain syndrome, and severe
arthroses)
• Maximum daily oral dose recommended based on risk of overdose/death is 50 mg MED
• Use of opioid agreement with family participation
• Baseline and random UDT (urine drug testing); in certain situations, other studies such as hair for
remote use or blood for acute toxicity) may be appropriate
• Opioid treatment for patients who are in safety sensitive jobs is not recommended
• Opioid treatment for non-malignant pain is not recommended unless the opioid prescription is
patient-specific and limited to cases in which other treatments are insufficient and above
criteria for opioid use are met
• Opioid treatment is not recommended for routine treatment of breakthrough pain superimposed
on chronic pain in the absence of overt trauma or acute nociceptive pathology (e.g. fracture,
heart attack, tooth abscess)
• Opioid treatment is not recommended with an intrathecal drug delivery system for chronic non-
malignant pain conditions
• Discontinue opioid treatment for sub-acute or chronic pain patients who have any one of the
following:
○ Have no functional gain
○ Non-compliance
○ Aberrant drug screening results and/or diversion
○ Adverse effects such as cognitive impairment, falls, poor judgment, untreated sleep apnea,
psychological disorders, concurrent use of depressant medications like benzodiazepines
(Xanax, Ativan, Valium, etc.), and diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
• Tapering is recommended if opioids are moderate to high level (50-100 mg MED) on a long-term
basis
• Consultation with an addiction specialist or psychiatrist is recommended for complex patients
(high dose patients, prior withdrawal problems, complex psychosocial confounders)
• Transitioning to only an NSAID or Tylenol or complete cessation of analgesics is/are generally
indicated
In chronic pain patients, ACOEM guidelines recommend an opioid trial if [see Hegmann et al., “ACOEM
Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative Pain,” p.
e148, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)]:
• Severe disorders warranting opioid treatment for conditions like complex regional pain disorders,
severe radiculopathy, severe degenerative joint disease
• Other evidence based approaches for functional restorative pain therapy have failed in functional
improvement including the use of:
○ Physical restorative approaches (physical therapy, pool therapy)
○ Behavioral interventions
○ Self-applied modalities (e.g. home exercises)
○ Non-opioid drugs such as NSAIDs, acetaminophen, topical agents, SSRI anti-depressants,
anti-epileptic drugs (Lyrica, Neurontin) for nerve pain
Page 43 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
○ “For patient with back pain, this includes [previous trial of muscle relaxants (but not
concurrently with opioids)], fear avoidant belief training and ongoing progressive aerobic
exercise and strengthening exercises. For CRPS patients, this includes progressive
strengthening exercises. For degenerative joint disease patients, this includes [NSAIDs],
weight loss, aerobic, and strengthening exercises.”
○ Function is impaired by sub-acute or chronic severe pain; patient cannot work or exercise
○ Pain scales should not be relied upon
○ Make sure the patient is not getting opioids elsewhere (use a prescription monitoring data
base like CURES)
○ Review risk factors for overdose or death including concurrent use of benzodiazepines, illicit
substances including marijuana, unemployment status, but may use opioids if objective
evidence of significant trauma, or moderate to severe injuries
If an opioid trial is instituted, then follow the following instructions [see Hegmann et al., “ACOEM
Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative Pain,” p.
e148, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)]:
• Have a functional restoration plan with specific targets
• Active exercise program that is verified
• Use non-opioid prescriptions including ones listed above
• Informed consent with signed opioid treatment agreement
• Lowest effective opioid dose; use weaker types first; do not prescribe Demerol
• Only prescribe one opioid
• Prescribe on a regular basis, not as needed, consider at night, not while at work
• For trial period, one week supply; if it works then up to 90 day supply
• Frequent (i.e. once a week) follow up to track progress towards functional restoration goals,
adverse effects, compliance, surreptitious medication use
• Discontinuation of opioid prescription if there is no functional gain, resolution of pain, improvement
to the point not requiring opioids, intolerance or too many side effects, noncompliance, misuse,
aberrant drug screening results, diversion, or concurrent use of alcohol, benzodiazepine, or
sedating medications.
Maintenance of opioid medication treatment can occur if the trial criteria above is met, plus [see
Hegmann et al., “ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and
Post-Operative Pain,” p. e148, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)]:
• Less frequent follow up (three to six months) for patients who are stabilized
• Convert to long-acting opioid on a scheduled basis and not “as needed”
• As needed opioids not recommended for long term treatment of chronic pain unless there is an
acute severe injury
• Do not use sub-lingual Fentanyl for sub-acute or chronic pain patients
• Fentanyl patches require caution due to unpredictable absorption
• Contact prescription drug monitoring agents such as CURES
• Confirm on-going compliance with opioid agreement and informed consent
• Recommend Tramadol for chronic pain patients as first level opioid option [see Hegmann, p.
e147: “Tramadol seems to be a better initial option than more potent opioids. Nevertheless,
Page 44 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
with the long-term use, especially higher dose, it may be considered equivalent to other
opioids for the purposes of this guideline. It has also been associated with motor vehicle
crashes [citation omitted].”]
[v] Commentary and Analysis
Some commentary on the ACOEM opioid treatment guidelines is important at this point since it seems
likely that the guidelines announced in the ACOEM December 2014 white paper will be adopted in
whole by the California DWC Administrative Director. In fact, as this article is written, a proposed new
Chronic Pain Treatment MTUS is being proposed by the DWC with a separate Opioid Treatment MTUS
to be announced soon.
Maximum daily dose of 50 mg MED
What are missing from the actual guidelines quoted above are explanations and clarifications of
nuances of some of them. For example, in the guideline for a maximum daily dose of 50 mg MED, the
authors of the ACOEM white paper state [see Hegmann et al., “ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids
for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative Pain,” p. e146, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12
(Dec. 2014)]:
The maximum daily dose recommended based on risk of overdose/death is 50 mg MED [citation
omitted]. Exceeding that dose should be based on documented need, and incremental functional
gain increased surveillance for adverse effects and frequent reconsideration of benefit versus risk.
This implies that ACOEM will permit physicians to prescribe greater than 50 mg per day MED dosing
for patients with chronic pain who are dosage stabilized, highly functional, with minimal side effects,
and who have not changed types or dosing of opioid medications.
The reason this nuance is buried in the text and is not cited as a guideline is because the authors of the
ACOEM white paper admit that there are no studies of patients who are on long-term opioid medication
for nonmalignant chronic pain. The 67 chronic pain studies that the ACOEM panel reviewed involved
patients who were on at most 3 to 6 months of opioid medication treatment. Only one study was over 3
months—at 16 weeks [see Hegmann et al., “ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of
Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative Pain,” p. e147, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)].
There were no long term studies greater than 16 weeks reviewed by the ACOEM or any other group.
So how can utilization review physicians systematically deny long term opioid therapy when the sacred
cow evidence-based medicine does not exist for or against it? The ACOEM guidelines imply allowing
for long term use provided that the patient meets the criteria of dose stabilization, functional activities of
daily living, minimal side effects, and unchanged dose and type of opioid used. Physicians who treat
chronic pain patients must use this language in their requests for authorizations for these patients to
continue receiving long term opioid treatment.
Opioids that contain acetaminophen or ibuprofen
Also, use of NSAID or acetaminophen (Tylenol) at the same time as a short-acting opioid is
encouraged for acute pain. The authors of the ACOEM white paper state [see Hegmann et al.,
“ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative
Pain,” p. e146, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)]:
Based on expert opinion, NSAIDs or acetaminophen should generally accompany an opioid
prescription. Lower potency opioids are recommended when sufficient for pain relief. As-needed
dosing rather than scheduled is generally indicated.
What is interesting about the ACOEM guidelines is the absence of current research that cautions over-
prescribing of opioids that contain acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Many patients combine over the
counter acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Motrin) with their opioid medication, not knowing that
the opioid medication also contains acetaminophen or ibuprofen. High dosages of acetaminophen or
ibuprofen are known to be toxic to the liver for the former, and can affect kidney function or aggravate
hypertension for the latter. The threshold safety level of acetaminophen or ibuprofen is less than 3000
mg per day but the ACOEM white paper does not mention this risk.
Post-operative pain from major surgery
Page 45 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
For post-operative pain from major surgery, the authors of the ACOEM white paper state that [see
Hegmann et al., “ACOEM Practice Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and
Post-Operative Pain,” p. e146, JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)]:
[Use of] scheduled opioid medication is usually required. Opioids sufficient to participate in
therapeutic exercises (eg, progressive ambulation [after a total joint replacement]) and allow sleep
may be needed. (Bracketed information inserted by this author)
Implied in this text is the additional guideline that allows use of opioids in post-operative cases for
injured workers to participate in post-surgical physical therapy and for sleep.
Lower pain threshold
Another issue that is briefly mentioned in the ACOEM white paper is the fact that patients who currently
take opioids or have done so in the past have hyperalgesia (a lower pain threshold) than people who
have never taken an opioid medication. This is why ACOEM recommends trying non-opioid
medications as a first line treatment for pain. Disclosure: This author was the chairman of an
Institutional Review Board (IRB) [see 45 C.F.R. 46] in some of the studies cited in the ACOEM white
paper that established these findings using what is called a “cold-presser” test. The actual research
was funded by the National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA). The research cited by ACOEM was actually
intended to determine what emergency room physicians are supposed to do with severe trauma
patients who were already on opioid therapy for a separate medical condition. The problem becomes
the lower the pain threshold, the higher the dose or strength of the opioid is needed to provide the
same pain relief. This is why we have a national problem with tolerance and dependency on opioid
treatment.
Intrathecal pain pumps
Another controversy has been created in the ACOEM white paper by its recommendations against
using intrathecal pain pumps. This recommendation is contrary to the ODG guidelines, which do allow
for the use of implanted pain pumps that use opioid medications for chronic pain patients. In addition,
pain pumps are used routinely in general medicine as a last resort end point for treatment of chronic,
severe, intractable pain and are reimbursed under Medicare and other health plans. In many patients,
intrathecal pumps are safe and effective, and allow them to engage in activities of daily living. At least
the authors of the ACOEM white paper concede that if a patient already has a pain pump, don’t use
these guidelines to force discontinuation and removal of them [see Hegmann et al., “ACOEM Practice
Guidelines: Opioids for Treatment of Acute, Subacute, Chronic and Post-Operative Pain,” p. e149,
JOEM Vol. 56, No. 12 (Dec. 2014)].
The end justifies the means?
Policymakers in California are telling us by adopting these types of guidelines that employers should
not be required to pay for long-term opioid prescriptions. Perhaps in the future, medical treatment for
injured workers will be integrated into group or individual health plans and these guidelines will not be
necessary because community standards of medical care will prevail. Community standards of care
require individualized, patient-centered treatment protocols without the constraints of generalized
evidence-based guidelines.
However, the debate also exists in generalized medicine, outside the purview of medical treatment for
injured workers. In general medicine, the use of opioids for chronic pain is being discussed [see Alford,
“Weighing In on Opioids for Chronic Pain: The Barriers to Change,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, Vol. 310, No. 13 pp. 1351–1352, October 2, 2013]:
It is much less clear when to consider decreasing or stopping opioids in the setting of difficult to
measure subjective clinical outcomes such as pain, function, and quality of life. Opioid prescribing
guidelines emphasize consideration of discontinuation of opioids in the setting of opioid-associated
harm (e.g. intolerable adverse effects, aberrant medication-related behaviors, lack of progress
towards therapeutic goals) [citation omitted], or both. However, little attention has been given to
reassessing the need for continued opioid therapy in patients prescribed opioids for years, who
show evidence of persistent benefit and no harm. It is difficult to measure an individual patient’s
psychological changes associated with pain over time, which may alter the need for continued
Page 46 of 46
§ 8.06 Medical Information
opioid therapy. This question of the appropriate duration of opioid therapy has been listed as a key
research gap in the use of opioids for chronic pain by national pain societies [citation omitted].
Moreover, in the setting of busy outpatient practices, it takes less time to continue opioid therapy
than to discuss tapering or discontinuing opioids with patients who may be concerned that changes
in opioid doses will worsen their pain. Discussing opioid discontinuation is not only time consuming
but can also be emotion laden and uncomfortable with patients who are concerned about
maintaining access to opioids [citation omitted]. Another important barrier preventing clinicians
from discontinuing opioids is the lack of knowledge, confidence, and skill in how to taper opioids
safely in patients who are physically dependent. Although other analgesics [e.g. NSAIDs] can be
discontinued easily and without a taper, chronic opioid therapy often requires a gradual taper to
prevent pain hypersensitivity during opioid withdrawal [citation omitted]. Complicating this lack of
knowledge and skill is a lack of readily available evidence-based guidance about how to effectively
and safely taper opioids in patients with chronic pain.
This quotation remains in effect today and the ACOEM opioid treatment guidelines fail to describe the
reality of the treatment of chronic pain patients in the general medical population. There is no evidence-
based research to indicate how these patients should be treated and the role long term use of opioids
may benefit or harm them. How can ACOEM with no research tell us that chronic pain patients all need
to be weaned from the opioids? The debate will continue but the likely decision to adopt the ACOEM
opioid guidelines in California will cement the policymaker’s desire not to have employers and their
claims administrators pay for long term opioid therapies.
[27] Prescription Medicine Therapy Management
There is a movement in medicine that is emerging called “prescription therapy management” that creates an
intermediate level between physicians who prescribe medications and the pharmacy from where the
medications are obtained. In this context, pharmacists are taking the lead role to actually meet face to face with
patients and monitor their medication compliance. Medication compliance includes frequent meetings with the
patient (once a week), reviewing his or her medications and checking a data base that would indicate whether
or not a patient is obtaining Schedule II narcotics (mostly opioids) from other sources. This concept is getting
“legs” in private practice, and Medicare actually will pay a pharmacist to perform these services.
The most common medication therapy management services are being conducted for the treatment of
diabetes, hypertension and heart disease. This is because medication compliance for these medical conditions
are about 50% nationwide, which adds to the national costs of medical treatment due to unnecessary
emergency room visits and acute conditions that arise due to non-compliance with medication regiments.
This concept will be slow to emerge in the workers’ compensation community but would serve it well if and
when it gains acceptance by claims administrators. Many medications in our cases are obtained through the
mail, in order to save claims administrators costs. Someone should study the efficacy of prescription therapy
management in the context of chronic pain patients where a control group does not receive such services while
a study group does and the patients are followed up one, three and five years post MMI to see whether there is
a difference between the two groups in ADL functioning, work activities, medication intake and total medical
treatment costs.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 8.07
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.07 Medications
The following chart lists the brand or common and chemical names of drugs we regularly see in our cases
embedded in medical-legal reports, treating physician reports and subpoenaed medical records. Some physicians
randomly use the brand names, and others use the chemical name, causing us mortals much frustration in
determining exactly what drugs an injured worker is taking for what conditions. The information here can assist
counsel in determining during a deposition of an injured worker or of a physician exactly what medication is person
is taking and for what medical condition.
Some trends emerge when you see these medications. For example, drugs that are designated as an NSAID
means that they are non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, of which aspirin, naproxen, and ibuprofen are commonly
known. In virtually all NSAID drugs, FDA required warnings include heart attack, stroke, elevated blood pressure,
kidney or liver toxicity, and gastro-intestinal bleeding for long term use of these drugs.
Also, medications designated ending in “-am” or “-pam” are generally benzodiazepines, which are anti-anxiety
drugs called anxiolytics or “tranquilizers.” We know them better as Valium®, Xanax®, and others. These drugs are
highly addictive, and counsel is warned about injured workers who are taking this class of drugs on a long-term
basis. In fact, CMS (the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services) does not allow benzodiazepines to be
included in Workers’ Compensation Medicare Set-Aside (WCMSA) arrangements at all because of dependency and
addiction.
The same is true for sleep medications such as Ambien and Lunesta, which seem to be the sleeping pills “de jure”
as of late. Most physicians should only prescribe a 10- to 15-day supply of these sedative drugs because of
dependency that develops quickly for patients who rely on them for sleep disorders. Ambien, Lunesta and drugs like
them are great for acute pain, acute depression or shock, such as a death of a loved one, but dependency and
addiction are quick to follow. There also is increased risk of sleep walking for patients who are on these hypnotic
drugs.
We have included the medications for hypertension, regardless of its class as a beta blocker, ACE inhibitor,
angiotensin II receptor blocker, diuretic, or calcium channel blocker. All of these classes of drugs have various side
effects including dizziness, chronic cough, loss of libido and frequent urination. The determination of which of these
classes of drugs to prescribe depends upon the type of hypertension that is diagnosed, how bad it is and whether or
not the heart is involved as well with its own problems.
Also included are the opiate based pain reducers, also called “opioid analgesics,” which are commonly seen in our
cases, under a combination of the chemical and brand names. The number, names and types of opiate based
narcotics are mind boggling, and it is no surprise that it is not unusual for injured workers to be on many of these
drugs at the same time. For example, it is not unusual for an injured worker who has a chronic pain syndrome to be
on a fentanyl patch at the same time as he or she is taking oral opiate based medications, such as Vicodin®. If you
want to check out a drug that is not listed here, go to drugs.com and pay attention to the FDA references at the
website.
We also included diabetes medications so that you can tell if someone is a diabetic, simply based on their intake of
medication. So if you see in a medical record that someone is taking Glucophage (metformin), you can be sure that
Page 2 of 6
§ 8.07 Medications
person has definitely been diagnosed as a diabetic. This is because there is no such thing as a preventative
diabetic medication.
There are also drugs called “neuroleptics,” which were originally formulated as anti-seizure medications. Recent
ones include gabapentin, also known as Neurontin® and pregabalin, also known as Lyrica®. These drugs, though
originally formulated for use as anti-convulsive medications, also reduced nerve-based pain (burning type pain) and
are now widely used for medical conditions that are thought to be neurogenic such as fibromyalgia, diabetic
polyneuropathies and other chronic pain syndromes.
We are not including vitamins and dietary supplements even though some have known powerful effects and
perhaps should be regulated as a drug. St. John’s Wort is a known anti-depressant, for example, but it can be
purchased in any “health foods” section of a grocery store over the counter. In fact, some prescription anti-
depressants warn users of those drugs not to take any dietary supplements with the drug. Some interesting
research is emerging now on Omega 3 fish oil. Recent studies have shown that in moderate quantities, Omega 3
fish oil reduces aggression and hostility and also has cardio-protective properties.
Drugs change every year, and new ones emerge all the time as reformulated versions of earlier drugs. This is
because of funky patent laws for the formulations of drugs, which last only seven years. A change in the isomer of a
drug can buy a drug company additional time for a patent, for example.
Generic drugs are supposed to have the same bio-activity as the brand name but some do not, especially
psychotropic and heart medications. This is because of filler products that generic manufacturers use as part of a
medication. Sometimes, for example, the coating of a generic drug dissolves at a different rate than the brand
named drug, causing a difference in bio-availability of the active ingredient.
BRAND NAME
CHEMICAL
NAME
GENERAL USE
Proventil, Ventolin
albuterol
asthma, RADS
Xanax
alprazolam
anti-anxiety
(anxiolytic)
Elavil, Endep
amitriptyline
tricyclic
antidepressant
Norvasc
amlodipine
blood pressure
med
Abilify
aripripazole
antidepressant
Tenormin
atenolol
blood pressure
med
Lipitor
atorvastatin
cholesterol
reducer
Lotensin
benazepril
blood pressure
med
Buprenex
Buprenorphine
opioid pain
reliever chronic
pain
Wellbutrin, Zyban
bupropion
antidepressant,
anti-smoking
Buspar
buspirone
anti-anxiety (not a
benzo)
Ativan
carazapam
anti-anxiety
(anxiolytic)
Tegretol
carbamazepine
anti-seizure,
nerve pain
Soma
carisoprodol
pain reducer
Celebrex
celecoxib
anti-inflammatory
Keflex
cephalexin
antibiotic
Page 3 of 6
§ 8.07 Medications
Librium
chlordiazepoxid
e
antipsychotic
(bipolar disorder)
Thorazine
chlorpromazine
amphetamine
Tagamet
cimetidine
anti-ulcer, GERD
Cipro, Ciloxan
ciprofloxacin
antibiotic
Klonopin
clonozepam
anti anxiety
(anxiolytic)
Plavix
clopidogel
anti-coagulent
Flexeril
cyclobenzaprin
e
muscle relaxant
Valium
diazepam
anti anxiety
(anxiolitic)
Cataflam, Voltaren
diclofenac
pain reliever
Dolobid
diflunisal
anti-inflammatory
Cardizem, Cartia,
Dilacor
diltiazem
heart
Benylin DM,
Dexalone
dextromethorph
an
cough
suppressant,
sleep
Benadryl, Nytol
diphenhydramin
e
anti-histamine,
sleep
Depakote
divalproex
anti-seizure
Aricep
donepezil
anti-dementia -
Alzheimers
Sinequan, Zonalon
doxepin
anti-depression,
anxiety
Cymbalta
duloxetine
anti-depressant,
pain
Vasotec
enalapril
blood pressure,
heart
Lovenox
enoxaparin
blood thinner for
DVT
Lexapro
escitalopram
anti-depressant
Nexium
esomeprazole
anti-ulcer, GERD
Lunesta
eszopiclone
sedative
(hypnotic) sleep
Lodine
etodolac
NSAID
Pepcid
famotidine
anti-ulcer, GERD
Actiq, Duragesic,
Sublimaze
fentanyl
opiate pain
reducer
Allegra
fexofenadine
anti-allergy
Prozac, Sarafem
fluoxetine
anti-depressant
(SSRI)
Dalmane
flurazepam
anti-anxiety
(anxiolytic)
Ansaid, Ocufen
flurbiprofen
NSAID
Luvox
fluvoxamine
anti-depressant
(SSRI)
Monopril
fosinopril
blood pressure
Lasix
furosemide
heart
Neurontin
gabapentin
anti-seizure,
nerve pain
Glucotrol
glipizide
diabetes (oral
med)
Diabeta, Glynase,
Micronase
glyburide
diabetes (oral
med)
Page 4 of 6
§ 8.07 Medications
Robitussin
guaifenesin
cough,
fibromyalgia
Haldol
haloperidol
anti-psychotic
(schiz)
Hydrodiuril, Esidrix
hydrochlorothia
z
ide“HCTZ” blood
pressure med
Dilaudid, Opana
hydromorphone
opiate pain
reducer
Plaquenil
hydroxychloroq
ui
neconnective
tissue diseases
Vistaril
hydroxyzine
antihistamine,
depression
Advil, Motrin,
Nuprin
ibuprofen
NSAID
Tofranil
imipramine
anti-psychotic
Indocin
indomethacin
blood thinner
Humulin, Novolin
insulin
diabetes
Novolog, Lantus,
Humalog
insulin
diabetes
Accutane
isotretinoin
vitamin A, acne
treatment
Orudis, Oruvail
ketoprofen
NSAID
Toradol
ketorolac
opiate pain
reliever
Prevacid
lansoprazole
anti ulcer, GERD
Keppra
levetiracetam
anti-seizure
Xylocaine
lidocaine
numbing agent
Zestril, Prinivil
lisinopril
blood pressure
Alavert, Claritin
loratadine
allergy
Ativan
lorazepam
anti-anxiety
(anxiolytic)
Cozaar
losartan
heart/blood
pressure
Provera
medroxyproges
terone
hormone
replacement
Mobic
meloxicam
anti inflammatory
Demerol
meperidine
opiate pain
reducer
Glucophage
metformin
diabetes (oral
med)
Dolophine
methadone
opiate pain/opiate
antagonist
Robaxin
methocarbamol
muscle relaxant
Rheumatrex
methotrexate
rheumatoid
arthritis
Ritalin, Concerta
methylphenidat
e
amphetamine for
ADHD
Medrol
methylpredniso
ne
steriodal anti-
inflam
Lopressor, Toprol
metoprolol
blood pressure
Remeron
mirtazapine
teracyclic anti-
depression
Provigil
modafinil
stimulant to stay
awake
Singulair
montelukast
anti-allergy
MS Contin
morphine
opiate pain
Page 5 of 6
§ 8.07 Medications
reducer
Avelox
moxifloxacin
antibiotic
Relafen
nabumetone
NSAID
Narcan
naloxone
opiate antagonist
(used for drug
overdoses)
Aleve, Naprosyn
naproxen
NSAID
Procaria, Adalat
nifedipine
heart/blood
pressure
Zyprexa
olanzapine
anti-psychotic (all
kinds)
Prilosec
omeprazole
anti-ulcer/GERD
Zofran
ondonsetron
anti nausea
Tamiflu
oseltamivir
anti flu virus
Daypro
oxaprozin
NSAID
Serax
oxazepam
anti-anxiety
(anxiolytic)
Oxycontin, Oxyir
oxycodone
opiate pain
reducer
Paxil
paroxetine
anti-depressant
(SSRI)
Dilantin
phenytoin
anti-seizure
Actos
pioglitazone
diabetic (oral)
Feldine
piroxicam
NSAID
Pravachol
pravastatin
cholesterol
reducer
Minipress
prazosin
blood pressure
Deltasone
prednisone
steroid anti-
inflammatory
Lyrica
pregabalin
anti-seizure,
neuro pain
Darvon, Dolene
propoxyphene
opiate pain
reducer
Darvocet
propoxyphine
same as Darvon
with Tylenol
Inderal
propranolol
blood thinner
Seroquil
quetiapine
antipsychotic
(schizo)
Accupril
quinapril
blood pressure
Cardioquin
quinidine
heart arrhythmia
Zantac
ranitidine
anti acid, GERD
Risperdal
risperidone
anti psychotic
(schizo)
Avandia
rosiglitazone
diabetes
Serevent
salmeterol
asthma
Advair
sameterol with
fluticaso
neasthma
Zoloft
setraline
anti-depressant
(SSRI)
Viagra
sildenafil
erectile
dysfunction
Zocor
simvastatin
cholesterol
reducer
Clinoril
sulindac
NSAID
Imitrex
sumatriptan
migraine
headaches
Page 6 of 6
§ 8.07 Medications
Prograf
tacrolimus
anti rejection med
Restoril
temazapam
anti-anxiety
(anxiolytic)
Topamax
topiramate
migraine
headaches,
seizures
Ultram
tramadol
pain med (not
opiate)
Desyrel
trazodone
sleeping aid, anti-
depress
Halcion
triazolam
hypnotic, anti-
anxiety
Diovan
valsartan
blood pressure
Levitra
vardenafil
erectile
dysfuntion
Effexor
venlafaxine
anti-depressant
Viibryd
Vilazodone
anti-depressant
for severe cases
Coumadin
warfarin
blood thinner
Ambien
zolpidem
sedative
(hypnotic) for
sleep
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 8.08
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.08 When to Develop the Record
[1] Overview
Trial judges and the WCAB itself are struggling with cases that involve the question of how apportionment of
permanent disability is established by medical specialists when the orthopedic injury is the primary initiating
cause of permanent disability. A recent case is a great example of everything that can go wrong from an
evidentiary standpoint that involved orthopedic, internal-rheumatology, and psyche and that resulted in the
Court of Appeal chastising both the trial judge and a WCAB panel for their failure to develop the record when
the treating psychologist failed to review the Applicant’s employment records, and the AME reports of the
orthopedic surgeon and rheumatologist.
In Radiator USA v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Kang) [(2015) 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 79 (court of appeal
decision not published in official reports)], the Applicant sustained an admitted specific back injury while driving
a truck that resulted in depression and a sleep disorder as compensable consequences of that injury. An AME
in orthopedic surgery opined that the Applicant’s lumbar spinal condition resulted in permanent disability that
was 50% due to the specific injury and 50% to non-industrial osteoporosis, an auto-immune disorder.
An AME in rheumatology confirmed the diagnosis of osteoporosis and concluded that the Applicant was
suffering from depression and a sleep disorder. The treating psychologist diagnosed depression and the sleep
disorder but did not review any of the Applicant’s medical records, the AME reports, or employment records.
The psychologist opined that the Applicant “probably” met the 51% threshold of causation of psychiatric injury
mandated by Labor Code § 3208.3 but requested review of the foregoing records in order to evaluate properly
the causation of injury, current disability status, and apportionment of disability.
Despite the lack of review of records by the psychologist, the matter went to trial and the judge found injury
AOE/COE to the Applicant’s psyche and in the form of sleep disorder as compensable consequences of the
orthopedic specific injury, and continuing TTD status. A WCAB panel upheld the WCJ’s findings and defendant
appealed. The Court of Appeal reversed and remanded the matter back to the trial level with instructions for the
WCAB and the judge to develop the record. This is because the treating psychologist never reviewed the AME
reports or any of the other records in the case and could not draw any conclusions about causation of injury,
temporary total disability status, or apportionment of permanent disability without a thorough review of the
records in the case.
The Court of Appeal cited Labor Code §§ 5906 and 5701, which empower the Appeals Board to develop the
record on its own motion while a case is on reconsideration, if the record is incomplete. In fact, the Court of
Appeal said the WCAB as an administrative agency has an affirmative duty to develop the record, especially if
medical evidence is evenly balanced on the issue of industrial causation [see West v. Industrial Acci. Com.
(1947) 79 Cal. App. 2d 711, 12 Cal. Comp. Cases 86, 180 P.2d 972; Lundberg v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
(1968) 69 Cal. 2d 436, 71 Cal. Rptr. 684, 33 Cal. Comp. Cases 656, 445 P.2d 300].
The Court of Appeal further stated: “The medical reporting in this case had a serious flaw which the appeals
board should have recognized and, had the responsibility, to cure … . While the defendant could have acted
more vigorously, it is also true that the appeals board ‘may not leave undeveloped matters which it acquired,
specialized knowledge should identify as requiring further evidence.’ [Citing West, 79 Cal. App. 2d at p. 719].”
[Radiator USA v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Kang) (2015) 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 79, 86 (court of appeal
decision not published in official reports) (emphasis by court of appeal)].
Page 2 of 4
§ 8.08 When to Develop the Record
What do we learn from this case? The applicant’s attorney had a duty to send the treating psychologist all of the
AME reports, employment records, and any other information, including the Applicant’s deposition transcript, if
any, so that she could issue an opinion that constitutes substantial medical evidence. The Defendant’s attorney
should never hang his or her hat on the notion that the Applicant has failed to meet his burden of proof of injury
AOE/COE. The trial judge should have realized that the record was incomplete on the issue of industrial
causation of the psychiatric component and apportionment of permanent disability.
The development of the record in these “cross-over” cases arises all the time. The Kang case is a rare example
of the failure of the parties, the trial judge, and the WCAB panel to develop the record so that the medical
evidence constitutes substantial medical evidence and is based on reasonable medical probability. The same
principle applies if the only remaining issue is apportionment of permanent disability.
The whole point is the struggle everyone has with respect to who has the burden of proof and when should a
judge or the WCAB bail someone out? The Applicant has the burden of proof for causation of injury, parts of
body injured, and permanent disability. The Defendant has the burden of proving apportionment of disability.
When does a trial judge have a duty to develop the record under McDuffie v. Los Angeles County Metropolitan
Transit Authority [(2002) 67 Cal. Comp. Cases 138 (Appeals Board en banc decision)] as opposed to not
bailing out an attorney who fails to complete or conduct discovery under San Bernardino Community Hospital v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (McKernan) [(1999) 74 Cal. App. 4th 928, 88 Cal. Rptr. 2d 516, 64 Cal. Comp.
Cases 986]?
[2] Best Practices
The best practices for a trial judge to develop the record should occur when neither party has presented
substantial evidence on which a judge’s decision could be based because no one bothered to conduct proper
discovery and the issue before the judge involves a critical medical-legal issue such as causation of injury,
causation of permanent disability, apportionment, current disability status, or need for future medical treatment.
The harder question is, when does a trial judge or WCAB panel allow further development of the record when
the only issue is apportionment of permanent disability? Is there a balance between a duty to develop the
record and bail out a defendant or simply conclude that the defendant failed to meet its burden of proving
apportionment? Does Labor Code § 4663 shift that burden in some way to the Applicant as well?
Case law is well established that it is proper for a judge to obtain evidence that would clear up uncertainty in a
case in order to accomplish substantial justice rather than decide the case on a deficit of proof [see Kuykendall
v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2000) 79 Cal. App. 4th 396, 94 Cal. Rptr. 2d 130, 65 Cal. Comp. Cases 264;
M/A Com-Phi vs. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Sevadjian) (1998) 65 Cal. App. 4th 1020, 76 Cal. Rptr. 2d 907,
63 Cal. Comp. Cases 821].
We know that the WCAB in its en banc decision in McDuffie provides workers’ compensation judges with a
template of how to develop the record after submission of a case for decision when the issue involves medical
or medical-legal conclusions. In McDuffie, the WCAB mandates trial judges to:
• Have the parties obtain a supplemental report or take the deposition of the physician;
• If the medical evidence is not substantial evidence, order the parties to try and select an AME;
• If the parties refuse to go to an AME, order a “regular physician” pursuant to Labor Code § 5701.
Can a WCJ write a letter to the physician asking the physician to answer questions the WCJ has concerning the
physician’s prior conclusions in his or her reports and deposition testimony? There is nothing in the Labor Code
or regulations that prohibit a judge from sending an interrogatory letter to a physician to answer questions that
may clarify a medical-legal issue or otherwise complete the medical record so that the judge can make a valid
decision based on substantial evidence. If a WCJ wants to write a post-trial interrogatory letter to an evaluating
physician (AME or PQME) rather than rely on the parties to develop the record, the WCJ should:
• Write the letter of inquiry to the evaluating physician
• Send the parties a Notice of Intent (NOI) to send the letter to the physician absent any written objection
from the parties within 15 days of service of the NOI on the parties
Page 3 of 4
§ 8.08 When to Develop the Record
• Send the letter to the physician with a request to address the written response in the form of a
supplemental report to the WCJ and the parties in accordance with service of reports in 8 Cal. Code
Reg. § 36(a)(1) for represented injured workers and 8 Cal. Code Reg. § 36(b)(1) for unrepresented
injured workers
• Issue a Notice of Intention to re-submit the case for decision
Remember, this only can occur after trial of the case on its merits and long after discovery has closed between
the parties pursuant to Labor Code § 5502(d)(3). The WCJ takes control over very limited discovery since the
case was already submitted for decision and the WCJ believes the record needs development, preferably on a
narrow issue.
A good example of a WCJ sending an interrogatory letter to an AME has occurred in psychiatric cases where
under Rolda v. Pitney Bowes, Inc. [(2001) 66 Cal. Comp. Cases 241 (Appeals Board en banc decision)], the
WCJ has to indicate to an AME psychiatrist what constitutes actual events of employment as judicial findings
and whether or not those actual events involved lawful, non-discriminatory, good faith personnel actions.
Another example is when the WCJ sends a letter to a panel QME who does not quite understand the definition
of a cumulative trauma injury and the judge provides the definition under Labor Code § 3208.1 along with a
description of Labor Code §§ 5412 and 5500.5(a) to determine if there are one or more CT injuries.
The same strategy can occur with determining causation of injury, causation of permanent disability, and
apportionment. For example, in a case in which the orthopedic surgeon concludes that 75% of the lumbar
spinal permanent disability is due to a specific injury and 25% is due to a cumulative trauma, is it substantial
medical evidence for a psychiatrist to conclude that apportionment of permanent psychiatric disability follows
the orthopedic apportionment? What if the psychiatrist concludes that the two injuries are “inextricably
intertwined” between the two separate injuries but the orthopedic surgeon says 75%-25%?
From an applicant attorney’s perspective, it is imperative that he or she confirms that the treating and
evaluating physicians comment on apportionment of permanent disability. Labor Code § 4663(b) requires it as
does long-standing case law [see Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board en
banc decision); E.L. Yeager Construction v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Gatten) (2006) 145 Cal. App. 4th
922, 52 Cal. Rptr. 3d 133, 71 Cal. Comp. Cases 1687; Benson v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2009) 170 Cal.
App. 4th 1535, 89 Cal. Rptr. 3d 166, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113].
Applicants’ attorneys should always send subpoenaed records, deposition transcripts, and employment records
to the treating and evaluating physicians and ask them to comment on apportionment, if any, and on any other
medical or medical-legal issue that may be addressed by a panel QME or AME in the case.
If a physician fails to comment on apportionment in an MMI report, that report will not constitute substantial
medical evidence and the Applicant will not have a complete record for the trial judge or WCAB panel. So in a
sense, the Applicant also has a burden of proof of apportionment to the extent that an evaluating or treating
physician has to comment on the subject, or else the physician’s conclusions are useless.
Regardless of whether or not an internist or psychiatrist/psychologist hitches his or her wagon on
apportionment to the orthopedic surgeon’s conclusions, all physicians MUST make an independent
determination of apportionment of permanent disability. Simply incorporating another physician’s conclusions is
not good enough. The parties, the trial judge, and the WCAB must require each reporting physician to explain
how and why he or she agrees with the orthopedic surgeon’s conclusions about apportionment if he or she
uses the same allocation of apportionment.
In all other situations, each physician in his or her own specialty must address apportionment based on his or
her own assessment of the Applicant under that specialty. It is possible in the lumbar spine example above with
75% cause of permanent disability due to a specific injury and 25% of the disability due to the cumulative
trauma injury, a psychiatrist or internist could easily conclude that permanent psychiatric disability or parts of
body under the internal medicine conditions cannot be parceled out between the two injuries for various
reasons. Again, the physician must state how and why the non-orthopedic disability cannot be apportioned
between the two injuries, or if it can, how and why it is. If the internist or psychiatrist agrees with the same
apportionment of permanent orthopedic disability, then that physician must state how and why the non-
orthopedic disability has the same apportionment.
Page 4 of 4
§ 8.08 When to Develop the Record
By the way, nowhere in the Benson decision does anyone use the term “inextricably intertwined” [see Benson
v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2009) 170 Cal. App. 4th 1535, 89 Cal. Rptr. 3d 166, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases
113]. The WCAB en banc decision and the Court of Appeal simply say: “We also agree that there may be
limited circumstances, not present here, when the evaluating physician cannot parcel out, with reasonable
medical probability, the approximate percentages to which each distinct industrial injury causally contributed to
the employee’s overall permanent disability. In such limited circumstances, when the employer has failed to
meet its burden of proof, a combined award of permanent disability may still be justified” [Benson v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (2009) 170 Cal. App. 4th 1535, 1560, 89 Cal. Rptr. 3d 166, 74 Cal. Comp. Cases 113].
In the example above, if the Applicant needed back surgery after the specific injury but did not need surgery
due to a concurrent cumulative trauma, it is possible that all evaluating physicians could apportion 100% of the
disability for everything to the specific injury if the facts support that conclusion even though there was a
specific injury and cumulative trauma injury. Alternatively, the outcome could be similar to that which occurred
in Escobedo where 50% of the permanent disability to the knee was work related and 50% was due to non-
industrial factors. As long as the physician explains how and why the physician came to that conclusion, then
the report constitutes substantial medical evidence if his or her conclusions are based on reasonable medical
probability.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 8.09
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 8
Medical Information Every Lawyer and Judge Should Know
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
This section of the guidebook will provide you with specific examples of reports from treating and evaluating
physicians whose conclusions did not constitute substantial medical evidence. Each flawed MMI report resulted in a
workers’ compensation judge’s rejection of a settlement and the requirement that the record be further developed in
accordance with McDuffie v. Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority [(2002) 67 Cal. Comp. Cases 138
(Appeals Board en banc decision)].
EXAMPLE #1:
A 64-year-old police officer worked for a local police agency as a patrol officer from May 10, 1988 through
March 26, 2014 when he retired. He developed the gradual onset of bilateral thumb pain and low back pain.
A panel QME declared his orthopedic conditions to have reached MMI on February 22, 2019.
On page 16 of his MMI report, the QME indicated under “X-ray Findings” of the right thumb the following:
“There appears to be a carpometacarpal thumb excision arthroplasty. There are two washers in the thumb
and second metacarpal noted.” Under the section “Diagnosis” the QME writes: “Status post excision
arthroplasty, right thumb carpometacarpal joint.”
On page 19 of his report, the QME provides the following impairment ratings for the right thumb: “With
regard to the hands/thumbs, the loss of motion is calculated using Figure 16-12 on page 456 and Figure 16-
15 on page 457. Regarding the right thumb, loss of thumb MP flexion is a 1% hand impairment and loss of
thumb IP flexion is a 4% hand impairment. A 5% hand impairment is calculated, which is converted to a 5%
upper extremity impairment, which is a 3% while person impairment.” This rating of the Applicant’s right
thumb loss of motion impairment is correct. The hand is 90% of the upper extremity and the upper extremity
is 60% of the whole person. There are three joints in the thumb.
However, the QME failed to rate the arthroplasty of the carpometacarpal (CMC) joint. This is the joint at the
base of the thumb that meets the wrist. Table 16-27 indicates that a resection arthroplasty of the
carpometacarpal joint is an 11% upper extremity (UE) impairment. Therefore, the loss of motion rating for
the right thumb is 5% UE combined with the 11% UE from the CMC arthroplasty, which equals 15% UE,
which converts to a 9% WPI rating.
The QME’s deposition was taken and his UE ratings were corrected along with some additional testing of
the lumbar spine to determine whether the Applicant falls under a DRE Category II or Category III
impairment rating. The QME’s rating of the left thumb based on loss of motion of the IP and MP joints was
correct.
The takeaway from this example is that counsel should always review any operative reports that exist in a
case because many physicians fail to include impairment ratings that automatically arise out of a medical
procedure such as a resection arthroplasty. In this case, the QME did carry over the operative findings, i.e.,
the arthroplasty, to his final conclusions, but he failed to provide the impairment rating for that factor. For
some reason, this QME failed to carry over the diagnosis and objective x-ray findings of the arthroplasty to
the final upper extremity impairment ratings of the right thumb.
Page 2 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
EXAMPLE #2:
A long-term assembly worker trips and falls on the
employer’s multi-building campus and injured her right arm
and shoulder. The diagnosis is right humeral head, proximal
humeral head four-part fracture. She has two surgeries: the
first one is a SLAP debridement (superior labrum from
anterior to posterior, and then a release for adhesive
capsulitis or a frozen shoulder. There is no MMI report from a
treating physician, so a panel QME is selected through her
counsel.
In his physical examination section of the MMI report, the
QME states: “Upper extremity motor function shows that
deltoid 3 to 4/5, biceps 4/5, triceps 4/5.” He then correctly
provides the six ranges of motion of the right injured
shoulder. Under his examination section, the QME writes:
“Right shoulder strength is 3/5 throughout shoulder girdle.”
Under the section “Impairment Rating,” the QME states:
“Flexion 80 degrees, 7% UE Fig. 16-40; Extension 25
degrees, 3% UE, Fig. 16-43, Abduction 80 degrees, 5% UE,
Fig. 16-43, Adduction 0% UE, External rotation 1% UE, Fig
16-46; Total 16% UE, conversion table; Table 16-3 10% WPI;
chronic pain, add 3% WPI; Grand Total = 13% WPI.”
The QME then states under Future Medical: “Claimant’s right
shoulder joint condition is likely beyond the remedial
capability of arthroscopic technique. Right shoulder joint
pathology may require total shoulder replacement.”
What mistake did this QME make? First of all, the value of
the glenohumeral joint is 36% WPI pursuant to Table 16-18.
This Applicant is a candidate for a total shoulder replacement
based on the QME’s findings. Therefore, a 13% WPI rating
empirically is inadequate and inaccurate. What this means is
that the panel QME failed to apply Table 16-35, which is
manual muscle strength testing along with the range of
motion measurements he did find later in his report. He
provided the raw data needed to rate the manual muscle
strength loss, but he did not carry those objective findings
forward to his discussion of permanent impairment. The raw
data was provided by the physician and Table 16-35 is easily
applied.
The AMA Guides indicate that loss of motion combined with
loss of strength should not be combined unless there is a
pathophysiological reason to do so that is explained by a
physician and the patient is not inhibited from using
maximum effort.
Page 3 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
In this case, both range of motion and strength loss are
applicable because of the severe degeneration of the
Applicant’s entire right shoulder joint four years after her
specific injury of April 16, 2010. She was examined by the
QME in August 2014 by which time the devastating effect of
the four-part proximal humeral head fracture with two
shoulder surgeries including a SLAP debridement and
release of adhesive capsulitis after a frozen shoulder joint
had occurred. The Applicant had multiple fractures of her
humeral head with post-traumatic arthritis and changes to her
glenohumeral joint. This involves separate pathophysiological
causes that resulted in her loss of strength and loss of
shoulder motion.
Accordingly, the Applicant has the following permanent
disability based on a review of the entirety of the QME report:
Based on the conclusions of the QME as to loss of range of
motion:
Right shoulder Flexion 80 degrees:
7% UE
Extension 25
degrees:
3% UE
Abduction 80
degrees:
5% UE
Adduction normal:
0% UE
External Rotation:
1% UE
Internal Rotation:
0% UE
Total UE for loss of motion:
16% UE
Grade 3/5 muscle strength testing Table
16-35:
Flexion: 30% of 24
UE =
7% U
Extension: 30% of 6
UE =
2% UE
Abduction: 30% of
12 UE =
4% U
Adduction: 30% of 6
UE =
2% U
Internal Rotation:
30% of 6 UE =
2% UE
External Rotation:
30% of 6 UE =
2% UE
Total UE for muscle strength loss:
19% UE
19% UE strength loss combined 16% UE range of motion =
32% UE = 19% WPI plus 3% for pain related impairment =
22% WPI.
Page 4 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
The final rating is as follows:
16.02.01.00 – 19 + 3% pain = 22 – [7] 30 – 221F – 30 – 35%
Final PD
The original rating was only 10% WPI for the range of motion
loss, plus 3% WPI for pain related impairment. The more
accurate rating is 22% WPI that includes the 3% WPI pain
add-on. Counsel should be aware that the loss of motion and
manual muscle strength ratings are in UE and then combined
using the CVC, then converted to WPI, then the 3% WPI pain
add-on is added to the 19% WPI. This rating is based on the
2005 permanent disability rating schedule instructions on
page 1–11, which states in part:
Multiple impairments such as those involving a single
part of an extremity e.g. two impairments involving a
shoulder such as shoulder instability and limited range of
motion, are combined at the upper extremity level, then
converted to whole person impairment and adjusted
before being combined with other parts of the same
extremity.
The justification of the 3% WPI pain add-on included
consideration for the fact that the Applicant was severely
restricted by the QME to the use of her right dominant arm.
He stated she is limited to: “semi-sedentary work; Right arm
usage limited to light lift, less than 10 pounds and elevate
shoulder to less than 80 degrees.”
There are multiple takeaways in this example since shoulder
impairments are complex and physicians do not carry over
many objective ratable findings to the discussion of
permanent impairment. Also, make sure physicians use
upper extremity measurements for the range of motion and
other upper extremity disorders and do not mix them up with
WPI ratings for the same part of body.
EXAMPLE #3:
A commercial kitchen worker sustained a crush injury to the fifth digit on his left hand (his pinky). The
Applicant had reconstruction surgery to the finger including debridement and amputation to the PIP joint
(Proximal Interphalangeal Joint—the one just north of the knuckle). Under “Objective Factors of Permanent
Disability,” the treating physician in his MMI report found that “the patient has an amputation of the left small
finger through the PIP joint level; the patient has a relative loss of grip strength on the left. Given the grip
strengths on the right, it would be anticipated that the [normal] grip strengths on the left would range
between 25 and 27.”
Under objective findings, the physician tested the Applicant’s grip strength three times comparing the left
injured with the right uninjured hand: 30-28-28 kilograms; left injured hand: 14-16-12 kilograms. (A kilogram
Page 5 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
is 2.2 pounds). This is a 50% loss of grip strength for the left hand. “He has left small finger amputation with
subsequent necrosis; status post left small finger crush injury July 24, 2018, status post irrigation,
debridement and disarticulation of the left small finger.”
Under the impairment rating, the PTP stated: “The patient has no swelling and his grip strengths are not
ratable. His amputation through the PIP joint level rates an 80% small finger impairment (Figure 16-5, page
443). An 80% small finger impairment corresponds to an 8% hand impairment (Table 16-1, page 438). An
8% hand impairment corresponds to a 7% upper extremity impairment. His residual pain based on Table 18-
1 and Section 18-3(D) of the AMA Guides rates an additional 2% impairment for a total upper extremity
impairment of 9%. A 9% upper extremity impairment corresponds to a 5% whole personal impairment (Table
16-3, page 439).”
What is the problem with this report? First of all, the physician added 2% upper extremity rating for pain
related impairment and did not add 2% WPI. Pain related impairment of up to 3% WPI are added to the
underlying WPI rating. You never convert a pain related impairment into an UE or LE rating to accommodate
an upper extremity or lower extremity impairment. Pain related impairments are always expressed in WPI.
See the 2005 PDRS, page 1–12.
Secondly, 75–80% of a person’s grip strength is from the function of the thumb, 4th, and 5th digits. This
Applicant has lost most of his left pinky finger, which significantly results in 50% grip loss. A 50% loss of grip
strength rates 20% UE or 12% WPI based on Table 16-34. A more accurate rating of this case would be
based on grip loss with no pain add-on since there is no evidence of any neurologic deficits. Third, this
physician never rated the amputation itself which rates 4% WPI based on the formula set forth in Figures 16-
3, 16-4, and 16-5 and the instructions on pages 442 and 443 of the AMA Guides. A creative PTP, QME, or
AME could hypothetically combine the amputation rating, which is an anatomic rating with the grip loss
which is a functional loss. This case would justify this method if the physician explained how and why this is
the most accurate method of rating.
EXAMPLE #4:
An office supply clerk sustains a cumulative trauma
injury to her right shoulder. The diagnostic testing
reveals that she has a right supraspinatus tendon tear,
tendinitis of the right supraspinatus tendon, and
tendinitis of the right biceps tendon. In his physical
examination section, the primary treating physician’s
MMI report indicates the following measurements:
Flexion: 160
Extension: 50
Abduction: 180
Adduction: 50
Internal Rotation: 90
External Rotation: 90
There are no manual muscle strength test results
indicated in the MMI report, and the treating physician
Page 6 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
indicates apportionment is to the cumulative trauma of
the Applicant’s work activities. Stipulations With
Request for Award were submitted based on this MMI
reports to a workers’ compensation judge for approval
with a 0% permanent disability award. What is wrong
with this picture?
One of the most common mistakes physicians make is
that they fail to include the six normal ranges of motion
in
shoulder
cases
along
with
their
actual
measurements. In this case, the physician should have
included the normal ranges of motion for the shoulder
as indicated in the AMA Guides, pages 475–479
(Figures 16-38 through 16-46). The medical report
should have looked like this:
Flexion: 160
(Normal 180) = 1% UE
Impairment,
Figure 16-40, page 476
Extension: 50
(Normal 50)
Abduction: 180
(Normal 180)
Adduction: 50
(Normal 50)
Internal Rotation: 90
(Normal 90)
External Rotation:
90
(Normal 90)
Another common mistake many physicians make in
shoulder cases like this one is to not provide manual
muscle strength measurements as indicated in Table
16-35 on page 510 of the AMA Guides. The weakness
of each range of motion are added together and
separately rated as upper extremity ratings and then
combined with the added upper extremity impairments
for the loss of motion for each of the six shoulder
ranges of motion listed above. In this case, the judge
rejected the proposed 0% Stipulations and ordered the
parties to go to a panel qualified medical examiner or
agreed medical examiner. This is because the red flag
in this case was the fact that the Applicant “has severe
right supraspinatus tendinosis of the right shoulder with
a partial full thickness tear of the rotator cuff”, which
was stated in the body of the treating physician’s MMI
report.
EXAMPLE #5:
A clerk typist develops left wrist pain and a lump on the dorsal side of her left wrist. The patient is treated
conservatively and ultimately has the following diagnoses at the time of MMI: “Left wrist joint pain, left carpal
tunnel release surgery, and excision of the ganglion cyst of the left dorsal wrist.” There was no grip testing
Page 7 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
for either left or right hands at the time of the MMI examination. The following tests were negative at the time
of MMI: Tinel’s, Phalen’s and Finkelstein’s. The treating physician assigned a 0% WPI rating and did not
state the basis for the 0% WPI. A 0% permanent disability Stipulations for Request for Award was presented
for approval by a workers’ compensation judge. The Stipulations for 0% permanent disability was rejected by
the judge.
At the very least, the treating physician should have assigned at least a 5% UE rating based on page 495 of
the AMA Guides. This is true even if the patient had a good result from the carpal tunnel release and
ganglion cyst surgeries. A reasonable hand specialist would have been justified in evaluating a possible
ratable grip loss since this patient has more than one diagnosis at the same wrist. In any event, this
physician never applied Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15, which is the first item on page 495 to apply in a
carpal tunnel post-surgical case.
EXAMPLE #6:
A construction worker stepped into a hole at a construction site
and twisted his right knee. He had a partial medial and lateral
meniscectomy and an ACL repair. The treating physician in his
MMI report states as follows:
Impairment rating: 4% WPI. Based on the AMA Guides
Chapter 17 the patient qualifies under impairment
estimates for diagnosis 17–33. Whole person impairment of
partial medial and lateral meniscectomy, 4% whole person
and 10% lower extremity impairment. The patient has a
functioning ACL without evidence of laxity and, therefore,
qualifies for a 4% whole person impairment, 10% lower
extremity impairment.
Then, in the same MMI report, the physician states under
objective factors of disability: “There is some crepitus with range
of motion. He does have a stable knee and full range of motion
with full strength.”
There is a multitude of problems with this report. What is this
patient’s overall WPI rating for his knee? At first, the physician
says “4% WPI.” Then, he or she mixes up ratings in lower
extremity (LE) and WPI. It appears that he gives no impairment
rating for the ACL reconstruction surgery, but he does give a
10% LE for the medial and lateral partial meniscectomies. In
reality, Table 17-33 is a diagnosis based rating system and
what you see is what you get. In other words, regardless of the
outcome of treatment, a person will get a lower extremity rating
if the original diagnosis for the ACL was ligament laxity, which
by definition is what happens with a damaged or torn ACL.
Even if the ACL reconstruction surgery was successful and
eliminated the ligament laxity, the patient still gets the rating for
the laxity since the ACL is going to wear out after being repaired
or replaced. Medically, this is a known fact, which is why this is
a diagnosis based rating. So, the partial medial and lateral
meniscectomies are a 10% lower extremity (LE) rating. The
Page 8 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
ACL reconstruction is also a 10% lower extremity rating (LE).
As with the upper extremities, if there is more than one thing
wrong with the lower extremity body part, then all ratable factors
have to be expressed in lower extremity ratings, combined, and
then converted to whole person impairment by multiplying 40%
of the overall lower extremity rating.
What about the additional finding that there is crepitus of the
knee? Isn’t that a 2% WPI rating (a 5% LE rating)? Yes, it is,
based on the footnote under Table 17-31, which states: “In an
individual with a history of direct trauma, a complaint of
patellofemoral pain and crepitation on physical examination, but
without joint space narrowing on x-rays, a 2% whole person or
5% lower extremity impairment is given.” The treating physician
in his MMI report indicated the cause of the Applicant’s
permanent disability was solely due to the industrial injury and
there was no apportionment to non-industrial factors. The actual
final rating from this case should look like this:
Medial and Lateral
partial meniscectomies:
10% LE
Table 17-33
ACL Reconstruction:
10% LE
Table 17-33
Crepitus (Footnote,
Table 17-31:
5% LE
Table 17-31 fn
10 LE combined 10 LE = 19 LE
19 LE combined 5LE = 23% LE = 9% WPI.
Stipulations With Request for Award was presented for approval
based on a 4% WPI, and the settlement was rejected by the
workers’ compensation judge. The parties were given a choice
to agree with the above analysis and rate out a 9% WPI or to
obtain the opinion of a QME or AME.
EXAMPLE #7:
A 54-year-old tree surgeon supervisor fell off a ladder and landed on his left shoulder. He has pain in the left
shoulder, left arm, and left clavicle. At the time of the MMI report from his treating physician, the Applicant
has had intermittent sternoclavicular joint subluxation. He had completed three out of six physical therapy
sessions with no improvement. At the time of the MMI examination, x-rays reveal minimal lateral subluxation
of the clavicle with respect to the manubrium. There is also a small effusion in the left sternoclavicular joint,
along with some subarticular edema on the clavicular and manubrium sides of the joint. There are also small
marginal osteophytes on the clavicular side of the joint. These findings can be seen with chronic joint
instability and etiologies may include remote trauma or degenerative arthrosis. The Applicant’s shoulder
ranges of motion were normal. The final diagnosis was “left sternoclavicular joint subluxation.” Stipulations
With Request for Award for 0% permanent disability was presented for approval, based on a WPI of 0%.
Despite the fact that the treating physician declared the Applicant’s condition to have reached MMI status,
he administered a lidocaine injection to the sternoclavicular joint on the same day, releasing him to his
regular duties without restrictions. What is wrong with this picture?
Page 9 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
First of all, it is unusual to provide active treatment at the same day a physician finds the Applicant to have
reached MMI status. More importantly, there are two ways this condition could have been rated. The
proximal sternoclavicular joint is ratable under Table 16-18 and Table 16-27 with a maximum WPI value of
3% WPI in each Table. Since the Applicant’s joint has intermittent subluxations, it is probably justified to
assign a 3% WPI since it is no longer acting like a joint. While there is a rating for an arthroplasty of the
sternoclavicular joint under Table 16-27, the fact that there are recurrent subluxations of the joint essentially
has the same result as if the entire joint had been surgically removed as in an arthroplasty procedure.
Once this was pointed out to the claims administrator for the Applicant’s employer, a 3% WPI was rated out
to a 9% permanent disability and the judge approved Stipulations With Request for Award for a 9%
permanent disability award plus future medical treatment, and the Applicant chose not to seek the opinion of
a panel QME.
EXAMPLE #8:
55-year-old packer for a glass manufacturer had a 3400-pound steel frame loaded with glass panels run
over his left foot, resulting in a dislocated great toe. The Applicant had surgery to fuse the great toe’s first
interphalangeal joint [IPJ] with a reconstruction of the metatarsophalangeal joint [MPJ]. One year after the
surgery, he returned to work, wearing an orthotic device on his left foot. In the MMI report from the treating
podiatrist, it is noted that the Applicant walks with an “antalgic gait.” A walk-through Stipulations With
Request for Award was submitted to a judge for approval with a 0% permanent disability.
In his rejection of the 0% permanent disability proposed settlement, the judge indicated in the Order
Suspending Action on the settlement that the treating physician’s report “does not provide an evaluation for
the gait impairment pursuant to Table 17-5 or any other alternative rating for a dislocated great toe on the
left foot that has a surgically fused joint.” The judge recommended that the Applicant obtain an opinion from
a panel qualified medical evaluator in accordance with Labor Code § 4062.1, the procedure for an
unrepresented injured worker to obtain such an evaluation,
In fact, the Applicant did select a panel QME in podiatry and the QME listed the following objective findings
on examination: “Ankylosis and arthritis 1st IPJ, hallux limitus 1st MPJ, muscle weakness, atrophy calf, and
gait derangement.” The QME report has a very detailed description of the Applicant’s residual left foot
conditions as a result of this very serious injury. The report constitutes substantial medical evidence and can
be a model for any foot or ankle injury case. The QME’s description of how and why he came up with a 10%
WPI overall impairment rating is worth reading:
The Applicant has paresthesia beginning at the anterior left ankle to the dorsum of his toes.
Furthermore, he states he has paresthesia from the proximal 1st through 5th MPJ region distal to the
tips of 1st through 5th toes. There was no pain with range of motion to the left 1st IPJ but there is
complete ankylosis to the joint with no motion. There was mild pain with range of motion with
dorsiflexion to the right 1st MPJ but the joint motion is limited. That does not coincide with an arthritic
joint causing pain to the 1st IPJ necessitating a fusion. But it is reasonable why he would be having pain
at the 1st MPJ due to hallux limitus and jamming of the MPJ with dorsiflexion of the joint. It also makes
sense why he had a steppage gait and avoids a normal heel to toe gait, therefore avoiding dorsiflexion
of the 1st MPJ. His left foot is supinated and inverted because he is avoiding pressure to the medial
forefoot. Therefore, he may have a nerve compression injury to the dorsal digital (superficial dorsal
cutaneous) and plantar digital (medical plantar) nerves. His gait is altered secondarily because of
muscle weakness, limited range of motion to the 1st MPJ, no motion to the 1st IPJ, and possible nerve
pain.
Under objective factors, the QME stated: “Ankylosis and arthritis 1st IPJ, hallux limitus 1st MPJ, muscle
Page 10 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
weakness, atrophy calf, and gait derangement.” The QME utilized range of motion, ankylosis, and atrophy
from pages 530–552 and Tables 17-14, 17-30, 17-6 and 17-37 as follows:
Pages 533–538 and Table 17-14, range of motion toe impairment. The left 1st MPJ has mild limited
range of motion rated at 1% WPI and the 1st IPJ (moderate to severe) o degrees range of motion rated
at 2% WPI.
Pages 538–543 and Table 17-30, joint ankylosis toe. The 1st MPJ and IPJ have ankylosis with rating of
4% WPI.
Pages 530–531 and Table 17-6, muscle atrophy as measured to the calf with the right larger by 1 cm,
rated at 1% WPI.
Pages 550–551 and Table 17-37, peripheral nerve injury, the medical plantar nerve to the great toe with
rating 2% WPI.
Therefore, the total impairment rating is summed to (1+2+4+1+2) = 10% WPI, all based on the objective
findings on examination.
The DWC Disability Evaluation Unit (DEU) rated the above factors as follows:
Left Greater Toe ROM/Ankylosis 10 C5 C 2 = 17 LE = 7% WPI
17.09.07.00 – 7 – [1.4] 10 – 460H – 13 – 16 PD (A)
Left Calf Atrophy: 3 LE = 1% WPI
17.09.01.00 – 1 – [1.4] 1 – 460F - 1 – 1 PD (A)
Left Medical Plantar Nerve – Peripheral Nerve: 5 LE = 2% WPI
17.01.04.00 – 2 – [1.4] 3 – 460H – 5 – 6 PD (A)
(A) 16 combined 6 combined 1 = 22% Final Permanent Disability
This case illustrates a number of things. Number one, it raises the question of how many cases like this
slipped through the cracks and resulted in a 0% or extremely low permanent disability award if the judge
was not paying attention to the medical evidence behind a proposed Award? This case was presented for
approval by a judge on a walk-through basis. Number two, this case also illustrates that physicians are
reluctant to use Table 17-2, the cross-usage chart that prevents pyramiding impairments such as “diagnosis
based” with “atrophy.” The QME in this case simply stated that using the cross-usage chart was not accurate
in describing the devastating effect this injury has on the Applicant’s ability to ambulate. Number three, this
QME did not use station and gait impairments from Table 13–15 in Chapter 13, nor antalgic gait of up to 7%
WPI from Table 17-5 since he felt the objective findings added up to more specific and more accurate
impairment ratings. This case, after all, is a great toe injury and does not involve the entire foot or ankle.
EXAMPLE #9:
A 70-year-old right hand dominant boat mechanic was injured
on June 16, 2017, when he was breaking down a boat, and a
step he was standing on went out from under him and he fell on
to his right forearm, lacerating the arm and injuring his right
shoulder. An MRI of the shoulder showed evidence of a
Page 11 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
complete tear of the right supraspinatus with retraction and
complete tear of the right infraspinatus muscle tendons. There
was also significant glenohumeral osteoarthritis. On January
31, 2018, he had a right reverse total shoulder replacement
with 30 sessions of post-surgery physical therapy and an MMI
examination on November 2, 2018. The primary treating
physician assessed the final impairment rating as follows:
Right Shoulder ROM:
Flexion: 115
Degrees
(Normal is 180
degrees)
5% UE
Extension: 40
Degrees
(Normal is 50
degrees)
1% UE
Abduction: 90
degrees
(Normal is 180
degrees)
4% UE
Adduction: 15
degrees
(Normal is 50
degrees)
1% UE
Internal rotation:
90 degrees
(Normal is 90
degrees)
0% UE
External
rotation: 0
degrees
(Normal is 90
degrees)
2% UE
Total Right Shoulder ROM:
13% UE
“37% right upper extremity, 22% WPI based on the AMA
Guides: 24% UE, Table 16-27 total replacement of the right
shoulder joint, implant arthroplasty; 6% UE Figure 16-40 5%
UE for loss of flexion, 1% UE for loss of extension; 5% UE
Figure 16-43, 4% UE for loss of abduction, 1% UE for loss of
adduction; 2% UE Figure 16-46 2% UE for loss of external
rotation. There is no measured loss of internal rotation.” The
total UE impairment rating is 13% UE for the loss of motion and
24% UE for the implant arthroplasty from Table 16-27 for a total
of 37% UE which equals a 22% WPI (calculated by taking 60%
of 37UE).
What is the problem with this report? Technically, it is correct
where the treating physician combined the total reverse
shoulder replacement (implant arthroplasty) rating from Table
16-27 with the five out of six losses of motion of the joint. But
this example raises one of the most significant inconsistencies
in the AMA Guides. Some may even say it is one of the 300
errors in the Guides.
The full “value” of the glenohumeral joint in Table 16-18 is 36%
WPI. With a reverse total shoulder replacement, that joint no
longer exists. It is literally replaced by a metal socket that is
placed into the distal medial side of the humeral head. In
addition to the pre-replacement osteoarthritic glenohumeral
joint, this Applicant had two out of four torn and retracted
shoulder tendons. Once a tendon retracts, it is useless and
Page 12 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
cannot be surgically reconnected or anchored. Table 16-27
only applies to the glenohumeral joint itself and not to the
rotator cuff consisting of the four tendons. This physician could
have used the 36% WPI for the complete loss of the
glenohumeral joint combined with the loss of motion of the
shoulder, and combined with the use of Table 16-35 manual
muscle strength loss. This would have produced a much more
accurate WPI rating. People who have regular shoulder
surgery, such as a rotator cuff repair, consistently complain of a
loss of motion in one or two directions (usually abduction and
external rotation) and a long-term if not permanent loss of
strength.
This report can and does constitute substantial medical
evidence, and a settlement based on it would not be disturbed.
However, this example points out a significant inconsistency in
the AMA Guides involving an important WPI rating.
EXAMPLE #10:
A 27-year-old dishwasher at a restaurant on 11/14/13 lifts a
heavy bin of dishes and has the acute onset of low back pain.
Within one week, he retains counsel who sends him for
treatment with a chiropractor. The chiropractor’s MMI report
rates 47% WPI while a panel QME in orthopedic surgery rates
a 5% WPI. Both physician reports are wrong. Why?
The Chiropractor’s MMI report includes some of the following
factors:
The Applicant has normal gait; Sensation is decreased in
the right lower extremity over the L4-S1 dermatome; Motor
strength is decreased in the left quadriceps, hamstrings,
tibialis anterior, peroneus longus, and extensor hallucis
muscles (L4-S1 dermatomes); motor strength is decreased
in the right peroneus longus and extensor hallucis muscles
(L5-S1 dermatomes); Knee jerk and Achilles reflexes are
decreased bilaterally.
Left Straight Leg Raise ranges to 10 degrees with pain
radiating to the buttock; Right Straight Leg Raise ranges to
12 degrees with pain radiating to the buttock. Range of
motion measurements are:
Lumbar Flexion:
12
degrees
(Normal is 60+
degrees) WPI = 8%
Lumbar
Extension:
9
degrees
(Normal is 25 degrees)
WPI = 5%
Lumbar Left
lateral bend:
12
degrees
(Normal is 25 degrees)
WPI = 3%
Page 13 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
Lumbar right
lateral bend:
15
degrees
(Normal is 25 degrees)
WPI = 2%
TOTAL WPI FOR LUMBAR
ROM:
18% WPI
Under Table 15-7 spinal disorders, he has disc herniations
at two levels with degenerative changes and radiculopathy
which is 7% plus 2% WPI under Sections IIC and IIF of
Table 15-7.
TOTAL WPI FOR SENSORY AND
MOTOR DEFICITS:
7% WPI
He has radiculopathy in both lower extremities at multiple
levels, under Tables 15-15-, 15-16, 15-18 he has Grade 4,
25% sensory and motor deficits at each level of L4, L5 and
S1; with 9% LE, 9% LE, 5% LE for the left lower extremity;
and a 25% sensory and motor deficits at each level of L4,
5, and S1 with 1% LE, 1% LE, 9% LE, and 5% LE for the
right lower extremity. This totals 17% LE which is a 7%
WPI.
TOTAL WPI FOR SENSORY AND
MOTOR DEFICITS:
7% WPI
1/12/14 MRI LUMBAR SPINE:
L3-L4 broad based disc protrusion which causes
stenosis of the canal; disc measurements are neutral
5.4 mm, flexion 2.7 mm, extension 2.7 mm;
L4-L5: Broad based disc protrusion which causes
stenosis of the spinal canal;
There is associated stenosis of the bilateral lateral recess
with deviation of the visualized bilateral L5 transiting nerve
roots. Neutral 4.0 mm, flexion 5.4 mm, extension 5.4 mm.
L4-L5 (sic) Broad-based disc protrusion which causes
stenosis of the spinal canal. There is associated stenosis
of the bilateral lateral recess with deviation of the
visualized bilateral S1 transiting nerve roots. Neutral 4.0
mm, flexion 5.4 mm, extension 5.4 mm.
2/5/14 X-ray of the lumbar spine [by a reputable
radiologist] reveals “Normal lumbar spine examination with
no subluxation on flexion and extension.
3/10/13 CT of the lumbar spine [also from a reputable
radiologist]:
L3-4: 1-2 mm posterior disc bulge without evidence of
canal stenosis or neural foraminal narrowing;
L4-5: 2-3 mm posterior disc bulge resulting in mild left
neural foraminal narrowing; left facet joint has vacuum
Page 14 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
effect;
L5-S1: 3-4 mm posterior disc bulge resulting in mild
right and mild to moderate left neural foraminal
narrowing, mild canal stenosis,
4/4/14 EMG/NCV: Normal studies of the lower extremities
with
no
acute
or
chronic
denervation;
no
electrophysiological
evidence
of
peripheral
nerve
entrapment.
The chiropractor then goes through two pages of his report
applying the pain related impairment criteria in chapter 18 of
the AMA Guides and goes through all of the activities of daily
living criteria in Table 1-2 of the Guides and concludes there
should be a 3% WPI pain add-on. The chiropractor goes on to
apply an Epworth Sleep Study and puts the Applicant into a
Class I of Table 13-4 and assigns a 5% WPI rating for a sleep
disorder. He also adds another 8% WPI for emotional and
behavioral impairments based on Table 13-4 of the Guides. He
justifies doing the foregoing based on the “Almaraz Guzman
case for a more accurate WPI rating.” The chiropractor also
concluded there is no apportionment of permanent disability to
non-industrial factors.
The chiropractor’s summary of impairments is:
Lumbar disc herniations at L4-5 and L5-S1
with degenerative changes:
9%
Lumbar spine loss of motion:
18%
Left lumbar radiculopathy (decreased motor
strength):
8%
Right lumbar radiculopathy (decreased motor
and sensation):
7%
Limitation of daily social and interpersonal
functioning:
8%
Sleep impairment:
5%
Pain related impairment:
3%
TOTAL WHOLE PERSON IMPAIRMENT:
47%
This example is valuable because it assists counsel in finding
the red flags that indicate specific problems with medical
reports
and
to
more
closely
scrutinize
a
physician’s
conclusions. The context of this report is that it was submitted
to a trial judge at trial. A report from a panel QME in orthopedic
surgery was also submitted into evidence, and this doctor
concluded that the Applicant’s lumbar spine injury is MMI with a
DRE Category II 5% WPI and no apportionment of permanent
disability to non-industrial factor. The trial judge asked another
judge to read the treating physician’s report because the trial
judge felt there was “something fishy” about the chiropractor’s
report. What are the telltales of the red flags?
Page 15 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
There are a number of factors that caught the attention of the
reviewing judge. At the time of the MMI exam by his
chiropractor, the Applicant was 28 years old (he was 27 on the
date of injury), 5'11” and 266 pounds, which is about 70 pounds
overweight. The second red flag was the physical examination
section of the MMI report. The chiropractor indicated that the
straight leg raising (SLR) test was positive at 10 degrees with
the left leg and 12 degrees with the right leg. This is pure
nonsense. A straight leg raise test is a very reliable test to
determine if there is irritation of the sciatic nerve distribution
from
a
herniated
disc
or
other
nerve
compression
phenomenon. Usually, with a frank disc herniation, the SLR is
strongly positive at 60 degrees or more. A proper SLR test will
follow the illustration on page 405 of the Guides. In addition, a
proper examination would include both a supine SLR test and a
sitting SLR test where the patient is sitting on the edge of an
examination table and the physician brings the patient’s leg
from a gravity assisted level (the legs dangling off the table with
the knees bent) to 90 degrees of extension for each leg. This
result should be the exact same as for the supine SLR. SLR
testing is a gold standard to prove the existence of nerve root
irritation in clinical medicine and in social security disability
cases involving the lumbar spine.
The next red flag in this case was the chiropractor’s finding of
muscle weakness and motor strength deficits for lower
extremity dermatomes. The nerve conduction and EMG studies
were normal. When there is a sensory and motor deficit as bad
as this doctor claims there is, the electrophysiological testing
would also be positive, especially when there is motor function
impairment. The rule with nerve compression phenomenon is
that sensory deficits occur first, then motor deficits if there is
nerve damage. Once there are motor function deficits, then the
nerve damage is permanent. An example of this is a person
who has developed “drop foot”, which is evidence of permanent
nerve
damage
along
the
sciatic-tibial-peroneal
nerve
distribution.
The next red flag is the MRI scan results for the lumbar spine.
The MMI report “summarizes” the findings of the radiologist
who purportedly read the MRI for the lumbar spine. What
indicates that the MRI conclusions are bogus are the results of
the CT scan that is discussed later in the MMI report. The MRI
scan was performed less than 90 days from the date of injury.
There is no way the degenerative changes mentioned in the
MRI report is post traumatic. Usually with an acute injury such
as what occurred in this case (the Applicant lifting a heavy bin
of dishes), there would be one level of the spine, usually L4-L5
or L5-S1 that would show a herniation or disc bulge. There was
nothing like that in this MRI.
The other problem with the MRI report is the radiologist
indicating how many millimeters the “disc measurements” are.
Page 16 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
This is pure nonsense as well. The average diameter of the
lumbar spinal canal is 13 mm. The statement for example that
at L4-L5 the disc measurements are “neutral 4.0 mm, flexion
5.4 mm and extension 5.4 mm” is utter nonsense. It is hard to
believe that flexion-extension MRI scanning was even
performed. In fact, the gold standard to see if a patient has
spondylolisthesis is to perform flexion-extension x-rays and not
an MRI scan. A credible x-ray of the lumbar spine by another
radiologist found no evidence of subluxation on flexion and
extension x-rays. If the MRI radiologist is referring to what
diameter of the lumbar spinal canal is remaining due to spinal
stenosis, anyone with 4.0 mm or 5.4 mm left in the spinal canal
space would have extreme difficulty to walk or bend. That type
of spinal canal stenosis would require an emergent neural
foraminal and central canal decompression surgery.
What gives this case away the most is the result of the CT scan
of the lumbar spine which was conducted by a credible
radiologist. The CT scan indicates that the Applicant has a 1-2
mm bulge at L3-L4, a 2-3 mm at L4-L5, and a 3-4 mm bulge at
L5-S1. There is no frank nerve root impingement phenomenon.
These findings are not unusual for a 27-year-old man who
engages in heavy work and who is 70 pounds overweight.
Expressed a different way, these findings are within normal
limits for a man of this body habitus and age. The reference to
“vacuum phenomenon at the facet joint” means the facet joint is
degenerating, but the Faber test for sacroiliac pain was
negative.
Another red flag for this report is the fact that the chiropractor
claimed to utilize Almaraz-Guzman to include ratings for a
sleep disorder using Table 13-4 and for a psychiatric
impairment using Table 13-8. What the chiropractor did not
mention is that the date of injury in this case is in 2013, which
makes this case subject to the restrictions of Labor Code
§ 4660.1(c)(1) and there is no evidence that the injury was from
a violent act or a catastrophic injury. The only catastrophe is
the lack of credibility of this MMI report.
Of major concern about this MMI report is that the chiropractor
made the report look very authoritative, authentic, and
comprehensive. It is clear that the doctor has a significant
knowledge of the AMA Guides, but he dishonestly applies them
in a case that may rate at the most a 13% WPI if the Applicant
falls within a DRE III lumbar spinal impairment rating, which is
most likely.
On the other hand, the trial judge is faced with a panel QME
report that rates a DRE Category II 5% WPI, which is actually
the equivalent of a severe back sprain with some positive
findings on the imaging testing, probably the CT scan at L5-S1
for the 3-4 mm disc bulge. The PQME opined that the Applicant
does not have a radiculopathy at the time of his MMI
Page 17 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
examination, which places the case within a DRE Category II.
The PQME did not perform a range of motion analysis of the
case, probably because he does not know how to. This is
because of language he used in his report, that says the DRE
method rates higher in this case than the Range of Motion
method. Remember, that is a red flag, that the PQME does not
know how to perform the 12 steps of the ROM method for the
lumbar spine.
Therefore, is this case a 47% WPI or a 5% WPI? The best
friend of a workers’ compensation trial judge is McDuffie v. Los
Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority [(2002) 67 Cal.
Comp. Cases 138 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]. In many
cases including this one, the trial judge has to develop the
record. In this case, the trial judge vacated submission of the
case for decision, ordered the parties to a further hearing, and
requested that the parties agree to an agreed medical
examiner in orthopedic surgery. Failing an agreement to use an
AME, the judge will order a regular physician pursuant to Labor
Code § 5701, which will result in an agreed medical examiner
quality physician to sort this case out.
The other glaring problem with the treating physician’s MMI
report is that this Applicant is not a surgical candidate. How can
a low back injury result in a 47% WPI rating when there was no
surgery? That red flag can be seen by anyone who reviews this
report.
Example #11:
A 59-year-old employee worked as a cashier at a major chain grocery store for 28 years. On November 13,
2018, he had a “misstep” while walking at the self-check out lane and had pain in the left upper calf. He was
given crutches and medication, and in September 2019, he was declared MMI. He returned to work with no
restrictions and, at MMI, he reported pain after work shifts on a scale of severity of 5/10. MRI of the left knee
revealed osteoarthritis, a small Baker’s cyst, and mucoid degeneration of the medial meniscus and anterior
cruciate ligament. Under the physical examination section, the physician states: “Gait: antalgic, favors right
side; able to do only partial squat with left knee due to pain; impression: left knee sprain, left knee joint pain,
osteoarthritis of left knee, left gastrocnemius strain, left knee contusion. There does not appear to be any
ratable impairment in this case based on the AMA Guides 5th Edition.”
A 0% stipulated award was submitted to the WCAB for approval with a provision of future medical treatment.
The red flags for a judge to reject the settlement and order a panel QME in orthopedic surgery included the
following considerations:
There was medial joint line tenderness 10 months after the injury occurred; the injured worker walked with
an antalgic gait 10 months after the injury occurred; no cartilage interval measurements were discussed
from the results of the x-ray and MRI scan of the left knee. In addition, no muscle strength measurements for
flexion and extension of the left knee joint were given.
All of these factors could have justified a WPI rating of 7% from Table 17-5 on page 529 of the AMA Guides
simply based on the physical findings at the MMI examination. A PQME in orthopedic surgery would suspect
Page 18 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
a great deal of loss of cartilage interval based on the employee’s history of working on his feet as a cashier
for 28 years. All of the physical findings indicated above should have been considered as part of ratable
impairments based on Table 17-5 (antalgic gait), Table 17-8 (muscle strength loss), Table 17-33 (ACL
laxity), or Table 17-31 (cartilage loss). Some of these ratings may overlap, as some are functional losses
while others are anatomic. Usually mucoid degeneration results in surgery to clean up the ligament or
meniscus.
Example #12:
A 50-year-old nurse in a critical care unit of a hospital was moving an intubated patient when she
experienced acute pain to the right shoulder and right side of her neck. MRI studies of her neck and right
shoulder revealed a 3.69 mm right disc herniation at C4-5 and tendinosis, plus a 4 mm low-grade articular
surface partial thickness tear of the infraspinatus tendon, respectively. She was treated conservatively, with
physical therapy and cortisone injections that caused vaginal bleeding. Physical examination revealed
normal ranges of motion of both the cervical spine and right shoulder and normal muscle strength. She had
a positive Spurling maneuver and some tenderness to palpation of the right trapezius and right cervical
paraspinal muscles and the right shoulder itself. The diagnosis was “right C5 cervical radiculopathy and right
shoulder strain chronic with shoulder impingement.” The physician assigned 0% WPI for the right shoulder
and assigned a DRE Category II that equals 5% WPI. Under future medical treatment, the physician opined
the employee cannot tolerate further cortisone injections or any other steroid medication, with epidural
injections to the cervical spine and “potential for cervical spine surgery at the C4-5 level.”
The red flags for a judge to reject the settlement based on the 5% WPI for the cervical spine are as follows:
There was no manual muscle testing of the right shoulder ranges of motion (ref. Table 16-35) even though
the nurse has a torn tendon; the PTP failed to provide the actual measurements of shoulder range of motion;
the PTP assigned a DRE Category II when it is clear that the employee has a cervical radiculopathy which
should be rated as a DRE Category III.
A positive Spurling maneuver indicates compression of a nerve root coming from the cervical spine. The
physician instructs the patient to look down and to the side that bothers her. The physician applies
downward pressure on the head, directing the pressure towards the side where the radiculopathy is
suspected. The Spurling test is positive if the patient complains of sudden increase in numbness and pain
on the side being compressed.
A panel QME in orthopedic surgery assigned a DRE Category III WPI rating of 16% and 8% WPI for the
right shoulder due to loss of strength based on Table 16-35.
Example #13:
A 30-year-old waterproofing installer had a sudden onset of low back pain when he finished his shift on
August 7, 2018. He was declared MMI on May 21, 2019, with a 7% WPI based on DRE Category II. At MMI,
he complained of “right leg fatigue”, with some axial pain. He was treated with physical therapy and steroid
dose packs. An MRI lumbar spine performed on January 9, 2019 revealed: “at L4-L5 mild to moderate spinal
canal stenosis and moderate bilateral neural foraminal stenosis. There is a 6 mm central to right paracentral
disc protrusion with compression of the descending right L5 nerve and a posterior annular fissure at L4-L5.”
At MMI, the patient had negative straight leg raise tests (both supine and sitting), but the physician
described the patient as having “significant lumbar radiculopathy to the right lower extremity. He also has a
lumbar spine MRI showing a herniated disc causing compression on the right L5 nerve root. Consequently,
Page 19 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
he is classified as DRE Category II that calculates 7% impairment.”
The red flags for the judge to reject a settlement based on this report are as follows:
This construction laborer has a serious lumbar spinal injury, and the PTP was thinking that since the
employee returned to work, the physician should assign a low WPI rating or the physician has no clue how
to use the AMA Guides. In essence, this employee has one foot on an operating table and the other foot on
a banana peel.
This case is clearly a DRE Category III since the rating is diagnosis based and the clinical evidence is clear.
There is no evidence that treatment cured the radiculopathy, which is the only circumstance where a DRE III
to begin with can change to a DRE II at the time of MMI with successful treatment and the elimination of the
radiculopathy. If that was the case, the PTP should have pointed out the provision in column 2 for a DRE II
in Table 15-3 on page 384.
This Applicant is young (30 years old) with a terrible acute injury that will not get better in the long run. He
has both stenosis and nerve root impingement, and the WPI rating should be on the high end of a DRE III,
i.e., 13% WPI.
Example #14:
A 33-year-old production assistant was struck on the top of his head with a heavy piece of wood. Five
months later, he was declared MMI by a PQME in neurology, who opined the diagnosis was cerebral
concussion, post-traumatic headaches, slight post-concussion syndrome, probable right labyrinthine
concussion, possible ADHD and possible depression and anxiety. The Applicant had residual symptoms of
vertigo, nausea, loss of memory, and a perceived loss of vision in his right eye.
The patient was previously placed on Lexapro by the treating physician. In his MMI report, the PQME
assigned a 2% WPI for the headaches; Table 13-5 and 13-6 he assigned a Class 1 with a 3% WPI (Clinical
Dementia Scale and Mental Status, respectively). For the right labyrinthine concussion, he has a 2% WPI
based on Table 11-4 Vestibular Disorder, for a total WPI of 7% WPI. The judge rejected the proposed
Stipulations With Request for Award in this case because there was no psychiatric evaluation, even though
one was recommended by the PQME in neurology.
This case raises some important points about head injury cases. The red flag in this case is the fact that the
treating physician put the Applicant on Lexapro. Lexapro is a very strong anti-depressant medication. This
should have resulted in a separate WPI rating for mental/behavioral impairments from the head injury under
Table 13-8. IN fact, the PQME in neurology called for a psychiatric PQME evaluation, which was not
obtained.
In every head injury case, counsel should be aware that there may be more than one form of a concussion.
In this case, the neurologist did a great job of differentiating between the concussion-caused headaches,
and the labyrinthine concussion as a separate impairment. Table 11-4 is useful for any kind of vestibular
disorder, including chronic or episodic dizziness. In any acute head trauma case, counsel should also be
aware that there may be a cervical spine injury as well. In this case, there was no orthopedic claim, but it
was considered on the initial exam and ruled out as a factor.
Example #15:
Page 20 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
A 48-year-old program technician for the California Lottery had the insidious onset of left wrist and arm pain
due to prolonged keyboard and mouse use. She was treated conservatively to include wearing a wrist brace
at night and anti-inflammatory medications, and she refused to agree to an orthopedic hand surgery
consultation examination. She also declined a steroid injection. The Applicant did not miss time from work.
On MMI, the occupational medicine primary treating physician opined she has no ratable permanent
impairment but will need future medical treatment. Included in the MMI report was an EMG/NCV of the left
wrist median nerve that said, “Abnormal, Mild to moderate CTS in the left hand with demyelinating changes
in the sensory and motor nerves.” Range of motion of her wrists and fingers in both hands were normal. Grip
on the left was 14 kg, 19 kg, and 20 kg; grip on the right was 14 kg, 12 kg, and 15 kg. Normal grip for a 48-
year-old female under Table 16-32 is 23.4 kg for the dominant hand, and 21.5 kg for the non-dominant side.
A 0% Stipulation With Request for Award was rejected by the judge, and a panel QME in hand surgery was
obtained. The treating physician failed to take into account all of the objective medical findings in this case.
A common mistake occupational physicians make in these cases is that they assume there is no ratable
impairment if the patient does not lose time from work due to a work injury. While he diagnosed a work
related carpal tunnel syndrome in this patient, he found no ratable impairment even though it was glaringly
obvious she has impairment. He issued a 0% WPI simply based on the fact that the Applicant never lost
time from work. The panel QME in hand surgery applied Tables 16-10, 16-11 and 16-15 in accordance with
page 495 of the AMA Guides pertaining to carpal tunnel syndrome. While the PQME did not rate the case
using grip loss, the impairment rating of 6% WPI for the left hand was based on Grade 4 sensory and motor
loss of the left hand/wrist.
If this case involved bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, it is possible that an evaluating physician could have
used grip loss as a WPI rating method. However, in this case, there was too much variation in the
Applicant’s grip strength measurements for each hand. The readings should be within one or two kilograms
for the three readings. The grip testing in this case was not valid since there was too much variation
between the measurements for each hand. Counsel should always question the validity of grip testing when
there is this much variation between the three tries for each hand.
Example #16:
A 56-year-old parts assembler injured her
right shoulder when she reached for and
grabbed a heavy aluminum part. She
underwent right shoulder arthroscopy, with
rotator
cuff
repair
and
subacromial
decompression surgery. During her recovery
from the surgery, she had a cortisone
injection,
post-surgical
MRI
and
MR
arthrogram. At MMI, she rated her pain as 6
out of 10. Her MMI range of motion for the
right shoulder was:
Flexion
160 degrees (normal
180)
Extensio
n
50 degrees (normal
50)
Abductio
n
160 degrees (normal
180)
Page 21 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
Adductio
n
50 degrees (normal
50)
Internal
rotation
70 degrees (normal
90)
External
rotation
70 degrees (normal
90)
Motor strength was as follows:
Infraspinatus
4/5
Supraspinatus
4/5
All other strengths for the upper extremity
were
normal.
However,
the
physician
provided a permanent work restriction of no
repetitive overhead work and limited lifting,
pushing, and pulling to 15 pounds.
The treating physician found permanent
impairment based on the loss of motion per
Tables 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46 for a 3%
upper extremity impairment which rates a
total of 2% WPI. This resulted in a proposed
Stipulations With Request for Award for a
6% permanent disability rating. The judge
rejected
the
proposed
settlement
and
ordered a panel QME in shoulder surgery.
The red flags in this case include the fact
that the Applicant has loss of motion in four
ranges of motion and loss of strength in two
out of six planes. Another red flag is the fact
that she is restricted to lifting, pushing, and
pulling to less than 15 pounds. This patient
has adhesive capsulitis, which is a frozen
shoulder. The evidence of this is the
significant post surgical treatment, including
a steroid injection, which was probably
intended to reduce swelling and to break up
the adhesions. Any person who has a post-
shoulder surgery MRI or MRI arthrogram has
had a poor outcome from shoulder surgery.
This physician also failed to rate the
Applicant’s significant shoulder strength loss
using Table 16-35. In cases like this one, the
raters from the Disability Rating Unit will rate
shoulder loss of motion with loss of strength
since the findings at MMI justify it.
In shoulder surgery cases, most patients
complain of losing motion in abduction and
external rotation, even with good results
from rotator cuff surgery. This is true
Page 22 of 22
§ 8.09 Common Mistakes Physicians Make in Their MMI Reports
regardless of whether you are dealing with a
work related shoulder surgery. The other
common problem is patients lose the
strength to lift objects away from their body
on a permanent basis after having rotator
cuff surgery. If a patient is diabetic, the
chances of developing adhesive capsulitis is
very high and complications from shoulder
surgery are very common. It is wise to make
sure daily blood sugar levels are normal, and
the hemoglobin A1c test is less than 6.4
before shoulder surgery is conducted.
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp CHAPTER 9.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
CHAPTER 9 Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.01  Overview
§ 9.02  Proof of a Psychiatric Claim
§ 9.03  Use of Psychiatrist or Psychologist
§ 9.04  Cross-over With Civil Causes of Action
§ 9.05  DSM-5 TEXT REVISION Adopted by American Psychiatric Association and History of the DSM
§ 9.06  Elimination of Axes I through V; Introduction of World Health Organization Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS)
§ 9.07  Other Alternative WPI Rating Methods
§ 9.08  Pain Disorders
§ 9.09  Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Under the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR
§ 9.10  Adjustment Disorders
§ 9.11  Depression
§ 9.12  Anxiety Disorders
§ 9.13  Panic Disorder
§ 9.14  Determination of WPI Ratings Using the GAF Score
§ 9.15  Apportionment of Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.16  Rebutting a GAF Score
§ 9.17  How to Rate Chronic Pain Syndromes
§ 9.18  Rating Chronic Pain When There Is Objective Medical Evidence
§ 9.19  Rating Chronic Pain in the Absence of Objective Medical Evidence
§ 9.20  Rating Narcotic Addiction and Dependency
§ 9.21  Sleep Disorders
Page 2 of 2
Synopsis to CHAPTER 9 : Psychiatric Injuries
[1]  Introduction and Background
[2]  Ratability of Sleep Disorder
[3]  AMA Guides Discussion of Sleep Disorders
[4]  Checklist for Sleep Disorder Claims
§ 9.22  Limitation of Compensability of Physical-Mental Disorder Based on Good Faith Personnel Actions
[1]  Overview
[2]  County of San Bernardino v. W.C.A.B. (McCoy)
[3]  Lamb v. W.C.A.B.
[4]  Lockheed Martin v. W.C.A.B. (McCullough)
[5]  Rolda v. Pitney Bowes, Inc.
[6]  Larch v. Contra Costa County
§ 9.23  Definition of Malingering
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.01
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.01 Overview
Industrial injuries that result in psychiatric disabilities have always been problematic in the California workers’
compensation system. The 1997 Schedule for Rating Permanent Disabilities changed the protocols for rating
permanent psychiatric disabilities to require each physician to evaluate a person’s psychiatric condition along eight
work function impairments that were largely borrowed from those that have been used to determine eligibility for
Social Security disability benefits. See, for example, page 365 of the AMA Guides 5th Edition in which the criteria
for rating work function impairments due to psychiatric conditions are listed.
In light of the complexities of prosecuting and defending psychiatric injury claims, this guidebook now includes a
separate chapter that is dedicated solely to psychiatric injuries. In the post SB 863 era, litigation of psychiatric
injuries is continuing but now will include medical and legal definitions of a “catastrophic injury” and whether or not a
psyche case should be best evaluated by a psychiatrist, psychologist, or both. On top of all of these issues is the
fact that on May 10, 2013, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) adopted the Diagnostic Statistical Manual
5th revision (“DSM-5”). As will be discussed in this chapter, the diagnostic criteria for certain mental disorders have
radically changed and counsel’s familiarity with those changes is essential. For example, there is no longer a
diagnostic category for a Pain Disorder that was in the DMS-IV that we commonly see in our cases. There are new
diagnostic criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). There is also a new category called “Somatic
Symptom and Related Disorders” that includes the old somatoform disorder and pain disorders. Similarly, the
diagnostic criteria for depression have been modified.
Counsel will be able to use this chapter in any psychiatric case in order to follow the sequential steps in the
prosecution or defense of these cases with quick references to pertinent case law to support your position.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.02
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.02 Proof of a Psychiatric Claim
Proving the existence of an industrially related psychiatric injury has always been a challenge for applicant’s
counsel while the defense against these claims can also be difficult one. The shift from the 1997 Schedule for
Rating Permanent Disabilities to the 2005 PDRS effective 1/1/2005 changed how permanent psychiatric disability is
determined. However, the 2005 PDRS and the SB 899 legislation do not change any of the fundamental
requirements for the compensability of an industrially-related psychiatric injury. As described below, SB 863 in 2012
did change the requirements for compensability of a psychiatric condition that is caused by a physical industrial
injury. The requirements of Labor Code § 3208.3 must still be met in order for a psychiatric injury to be
compensable for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013. There has to be six months of employment in order for a
psychiatric condition to be considered industrially related, unless there is a sudden and extraordinary event of
employment [Labor Code § 3208.3(d)]. The six months of employment requirement applies in all psychiatric claims
[Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Garcia) (2003) 112 Cal. App. 4th 1435, 5 Cal. Rptr. 3d 822,
68 Cal. Comp. Cases 1575].
“In order to establish that a psychiatric injury is compensable, an employee shall demonstrate by a preponderance
of the evidence that actual events of employment were predominant as to all causes combined of the psychiatric
injury” [Labor Code § 3208.3(b)(1)]. The determination of whether an alleged psychiatric injury involves actual
events of employment is a question of fact and law, and the question of whether those events were the predominant
cause of the psychiatric injury is a question requiring medical evidence [Rolda v. Pitney Bowes, Inc. (2001) 66 Cal.
Comp. Cases 241 (Appeals Board en banc opinion)].
Under the Rolda analysis, the WCJ determines whether there were actual events of employment as a legal
question, the physician determines the causation of the psychiatric injury as a medical question, the WCJ then
determines whether the actual events were personnel actions, and, if so, whether they were lawful,
nondiscriminatory and in good faith, and the physician decides as a medical question whether the personnel actions
substantially caused (35%–40%) the psychiatric condition. Finally, the physician must offer a medical opinion as to
what percentage of the psychiatric condition is caused by personnel actions. Here is the four-step process of
analysis in the Rolda decision:
1. Does the alleged psychiatric injury involve actual events of employment, which is a factual and legal
determination made by the judge.
2. If so, are the actual events of employment the predominant cause (i.e., accounting for 51% of more) of the
psychiatric injury, which requires medical evidence from a physician.
3. If so, are any of the actual events of employment personnel actions that were lawful, non-discriminatory, and
in good faith, which are factual and legal determinations made by the judge.
4. If so, are the lawful, non-discriminatory, good faith personnel actions the substantial cause (accounting for at
least 35%–40%) of the psychiatric injury, which requires medical evidence from a physician.
A “personnel action” is action by or attributable to the employer if done by one who has authority over the injured
worker, in managing its business that includes but is not limited to reviewing, criticizing, demoting, or disciplining the
injured worker [see Larch v. Contra Costa County (1998) 63 Cal. Comp. Cases 831 (Appeals Board en banc
decision); City of Oakland v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Cullet) (2002) 99 Cal. App. 4th 261, 120 Cal. Rptr. 2d
873, 67 Cal. Comp. Cases 705].
Page 2 of 3
§ 9.02 Proof of a Psychiatric Claim
In a recent noteworthy panel decision, a trial judge issued very specific instructions to an AME in psychiatry in order
to apply Steps 2 and 4 in Rolda [Fujimoto v. Caliber Collision Centers, 2014 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 118]:
[P]lease provide a supplemental report that describes in detail, in accordance with Rolda all the workplace and
all the non-industrial related events and/or issues that combined caused the Applicant’s psychological injury.
You are then to assign a percentage of causation separately to each individual work-related and/or non-work
related events and/or issues that when combined, equal 100% of the causation of the Applicant’s psychological
injury. You are not to combine percentages as to any multiple factors and/or issues, either industrial or non-
industrial.
It will ultimately be up to [the judge] to decide which workplace activities are actual events [i.e., which of the
events described by the Applicant actually happened or not] and whether those events that [the judge] deemed
to be actual events are otherwise legitimate non-discriminatory, lawful, good-faith personnel actions. Based on
this, [the judge] can determine if the actual events of employment, if added together, will result in them being
the predominant cause [i.e., more than 50%] of the Applicant’s psychological injury and, whether those actual
causes were substantially caused [i.e., 35% to 45%] by lawful, non-discriminatory, good faith personnel
actions.
Your discussion should follow the following format:
[Employment Event #1]—[percentage of causation]
[Employment Event #2]—[percentage of causation], etc.
[Non-industrial Factor and/or Event #1]—[Percentage of Causation]
[Non-industrial Factor and/or Event #2]—[Percentage of Causation]
Total: 100%
The WCJ in this case evaluated the specific employment events as presented to the AME psychiatrist as if each
event was accepted as true. In addition, the WCJ requested the AME to comment on any evidence that the
applicant brought his own psycho-pathology to the work place which would exclude those factors from being
industrially related [Fujimoto v. Caliber Collision Centers, 2014 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 118]. See Verga v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(2008) 159 Cal. App. 4th 174, 70 Cal. Rptr. 3d 871, 73 Cal. Comp. Cases 63], in
which the WCAB found that the applicant’s perception of harassment from co-workers was based on the disdain the
co-workers had for the applicant’s mistreatment of them by being rude, inflexible, easily upset, and demeaning
toward them. This was found by the WCAB not to constitute actual events of employment. Also see County of San
Bernardino v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (McCoy) [(2012) 203 Cal. App. 4th 1469, 138 Cal. Rptr. 3d 328, 77 Cal.
Comp. Cases 219], which bars compensation for psychiatric injuries that cause physiological manifestations (such
as headaches, stomach aches) substantially caused by legitimate, non-discriminatory, good-faith personnel actions.
Remember, the analysis of causation of a work related psychiatric injury pursuant to Rolda is a completely separate
legal determination from the analysis of causation of psychiatric impairment which considers apportionment of
permanent disability. For example, it would not be unusual to have a case in which the causation of a psychiatric
injury meets the 51% threshold of causation under Labor Code § 3208.3 and the apportionment of permanent
disability is found to be 50% due to industrial factors and 50% due to non-industrial factors. Cases like this are still
compensable as long as the causation of the psychiatric condition is predominantly (51%) work related and are not
substantially due to good faith, non-discriminatory, lawful personnel actions.
The law still distinguishes between physical-mental, mental-mental, and mental-physical industrial injuries. The
analysis of compensability of a psychiatric injury is the same for all types of psychiatric claims. The “predominant
cause” threshold of compensability standard applies in all types of psychiatric cases, even ones that arise as a
result of a physical injury [Lockheed Martin v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (McCullough) (2002) 96 Cal. App. 4th
1237, 117 Cal. Rptr. 2d 865, 67 Cal. Comp. Cases 245].
Page 3 of 3
§ 9.02 Proof of a Psychiatric Claim
The determination of compensability of any industrial injury, including psychiatric injury, is independent of the 2004
legislation on apportionment of permanent disability to causation [see Lab. Code §§ 3600, 3208, 3208.3]. The
apportionment of permanent disability to causation mandated in Labor Code §§ 4663 and 4664 are irrelevant to the
threshold issue of causation of an injury arising out of employment and in the course and scope of employment
[Reyes v. Fremont Compensation Ins. Co. (Hart Plastering) (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 223 (Appeals Board
significant panel decision)].
In 2012, SB 863 changed the compensability of psychiatric injuries that result from physical industrial injuries. Labor
Code § 4660.1(c) mandates that sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction and psychiatric disorders caused by a physical
injury cannot cause an increase in a WPI rating unless there is a catastrophic injury. The employer must still provide
treatment for these disorders but no increase in WPI ratings can occur [see Hernandez v. Fremont Bank, 2015 Cal.
Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 470 (applicant entitled to panel QME in psychiatry)]. The exception is if a psychiatric
disorder is caused by a violent act, or direct exposure to significant violent act (referencing Labor Code § 3208.3) or
a catastrophic injury, including but not limited to, loss of a limb, paralysis, severe burn or severe head injury [see
Lab. Code § 4660.1].
Other than the four statutory examples given as definitions of a “catastrophic injury,” we do not know what the
legislature intended to mean by the term “catastrophic injury.” We do not know, for example, whether the reference
is to the underlying injury only or can include the results of an injury that is not necessarily catastrophic to begin with
but after medical complications arise becomes catastrophic to the injured worker. We have seen our share of failed
lumbar surgeries, chronic pain syndromes, failed knee replacements and other disastrous results of medical
treatment for industrial injuries, and we are not sure whether the legislature intended to exclude some of these
injured workers from receiving WPI ratings for psychiatric conditions that are caused from an underlying “non-
catastrophic” physical injury or treatment from one. As of September 2014, there is no published WCAB en banc
decision or court of appeal decision on what constitutes a “catastrophic injury.”
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.03
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.03 Use of Psychiatrist or Psychologist
This question arises in every workers’ compensation case: Do you use a psychologist or psychiatrist, or both for
treatment of injured workers who suffer from a work-related mental disorder? Do you ask for an AME or PQME in
psychiatry, psychology, or both? Which specialty is the most appropriate and will lead to substantial evidence?
In certain situations, a psychiatrist will provide medication management for an injured worker and is the most
qualified to supervise administration of a psychotropic medication or a combination of them. However, many
psychiatrists shy away from conducting cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) or other face-to-face one hour sessions
and leave that to a treating psychologist. In many cases, the quality of medical-legal reporting is better from some
psychologists than from some psychiatrists and vice versa.
So the choice counsel makes in deciding who to refer the injured worker to for treatment and evaluation has to be
made strategically on a case-by-case basis. It can be stated based on experience that having a psychiatrist
involved in psyche cases is preferred over the use of psychologists for medical-legal purposes in most workers’
compensation cases because a psychiatrist is a medical doctor with medical school training and is most qualified to
comment on medications and their side effects with overlapping commentary on other organic medical aspects of a
case, e.g., referral of a depressed injured worker to a neurologist to rule out multiple sclerosis, dementia, or other
disorders that could overlap with a psychiatric condition.
That being said, in cases in which the injured worker is claiming mild to moderate depression and is refractory to
taking psychotropic medications, a psychologist may be preferred over a psychiatrist for treatment and evaluation
purposes since research is showing that directed CBT sessions conducted by a psychologist improve a person’s
coping skills. It is also clear that a psychologist can tell if a patient’s signs, symptoms, and complaints are situational
or chronic and whether a given patient could benefit from CBT, psychotropic medication, or both.
When should counsel for an injured worker raise the issue of a psyche injury? This, too, is a controversial issue. In
some workers’ compensation organizations, it has been publically stated that “it is legal malpractice not to include
psyche as a part of a claim.” In other words, some law firms as a matter of policy within that law firm will allege
“psyche” in every case, presumably because of the desire for maximum recovery. But in many cases, such a
blanket policy works to the detriment of individual injured workers, does not and should not apply in a given case,
and does more harm than good for the client. For example, should a young person who may apply for government
or law enforcement employment want a record of a prior workers’ compensation claim with a psyche allegation?
Counsel for injured workers should use caution before alleging a psyche case. The injured worker should be fully
informed of the consequences of including a psyche component to his or her case. Counsel should also be aware
of whether the psyche claim will reach the 51% causation threshold of Labor Code § 3208.3. The injured worker
may be subject to severe scrutiny during his or her deposition that includes questions about personal matters dating
back to childhood. Any applicant’s attorney who sits next to an injured worker during a deposition should have fully
and completely prepared the injured worker for the types of questions that will be asked in a psyche case. There is
a mantra from some attorneys who represent injured workers—“why ruin a perfectly good orthopedic case with a
psyche case?”
All kidding aside, counsel for injured workers need to evaluate each case on the merits of including a psyche
component in a case if a mental disorder is part of other claimed parts of body injured. This is especially true in light
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.03 Use of Psychiatrist or Psychologist
of the 2012 reforms that prevent additional permanent disability for a psychiatric mental disorder that is a
compensable consequence of a physical injury that does not meet the definition of a “catastrophic injury” [see Lab.
Code § 4660.1(c)].
If counsel is claiming that the psychiatric condition is a compensable consequence of a physical injury, then
treatment for a mental disorder that is caused by the physical injury has to be treated on an industrial basis and the
limitation of Labor Code § 4660.1(c) only applies to permanent disability and not treatment for the industrially
related psychiatric condition.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.04
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.04 Cross-over With Civil Causes of Action
An additional strategic decision has to be made on the basis of a pure psychiatric case—one in which there is no
physical injury claim. The decision here involves whether to refer the injured employee to a civil attorney for a civil
action with or without filing a workers’ compensation case. The best examples are cases that involve sexual
harassment by a supervisor over a subordinate employee and the employee suffers from a mental disorder as a
result of that.
Recently a case involved a 32-year-old employee of a medical group when, six years prior to her going on a
medical leave, the employee had ended a three-year affair with her married supervisor. The supervisor spent the
remaining six years of the applicant’s career harassing and threatening her, writing her up for misconduct, and
destroying her reputation. This caused significant enough psychiatric problems for the employee that she qualified
for Social Security Disability benefits based on her psychiatric diagnosis alone. The case started as a workers’
compensation claim, but ended with a six-figure civil court settlement and a stipulated award in the workers’
compensation claim.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.05
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.05 DSM-5 TEXT REVISION Adopted by American Psychiatric Association
and History of the DSM
Why is the Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) important in California workers’ compensation
cases? What is the history of the DSM? This section covers the history of the DSM and its evolution to the present
version of it that was adopted by the American Psychiatric Association in 2022.
The importance of the DSM in California workers’ Compensation cases begins with any psychiatric claim for
benefits. Labor Code Section 3208.3(a) states in pertinent part:
A psychiatric injury shall be compensable if it is a mental disorder which causes disability or need for medical
treatment, and it is diagnosed pursuant to procedures promulgated under paragraph (4) of subdivision (j) of
Section 139.2 or, until these procedures are promulgated, it is diagnosed using the terminology and criteria of
the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition-
Revised, or the terminology and diagnostic criteria of other psychiatric diagnostic manuals generally approved
and accepted nationally by practitioners in the field of psychiatric medicine.
Notice the last sentence: “… using the terminology and criteria of the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition-Revised, or the terminology and diagnostic criteria of other
psychiatric diagnostic manuals generally approved and accepted nationally by practitioners in the field of psychiatric
medicine.” In 2022, the American Psychiatric Association adopted the DSM-5 Text Revised.
The first edition of the DSM was published in 1952. The DSM-II was published in 1968 and corresponded with the
International Classification of Diseases (ICD-8). The International Classification of Diseases is a coding system
used by physicians and payers to classify and code all diagnoses, symptoms, and procedures for medical claims
processing. The APA originally published its first version of a prototype DSM in 1884 based on institutionalized
mental patients. After World War II, DSM “evolved through four major editions into a diagnostic classification system
for psychiatrists, other physicians, and other mental health professionals that described the essential features of the
full range of mental disorders” [see DSM-5 page 6].
The DSM-III was published in 1980 with considerable research occurring between 1968 and 1980. By 1980, the
DSM combined current factors and consideration from psychiatric research, clinical practice and billing codes under
the ICD-9 that harmonized the diagnostic criteria across all three classes of information. The DSM-III-Revised was
published in 1987 that “changed that included explicit diagnostic criteria and a descriptive approach that attempted
to be neutral with respect to theories of etiology of mental disorders” [see DMS-5 TR page 6].
The DSM-IV was published in 1994 that involved a broad range of contributors whose goal was to “conduct a
comprehensive review of the literature to establish a firm empirical basis” for modifying the diagnostic criteria for
mental disorders. This edition was intended to harmonize the diagnostic criteria for mental conditions with the ICD-
10 which was published in 1992.
In 1999, the APA decided to embark on evaluating the DSM for further revision as a collaborative effort with the
World Health Organization (WHO), the National Institute of Mental Health (which is an arm of the National Institutes
of Health), and the World Psychiatric Association. The effort to develop the DSM-5 included review of studies,
publications, and peer reviewed scientific reports. The group who developed the DSM-5 included physicians,
Page 2 of 4
§ 9.05 DSM-5 TEXT REVISION Adopted by American Psychiatric Association and History of the DSM
psychologists,
social
workers,
nurses,
counselors,
epidemiologists,
statisticians,
neuroscientists,
and
neuropsychologists. In addition, opinions were obtained from individuals with mental disorders, family members of
people with mental disorders, lawyers, consumer organizations, and advocacy groups by providing feedback to the
proposed diagnostic criteria to be published in the revised edition.
The goals of the DSM-5 revision include the ability for practicing psychiatric and psychology physicians to use the
manual “(1) to be used by clinicians, and revisions must be feasible for routine clinical practice; (2)
recommendations for revisions should be guided by research evidence; (3) where possible, continuity should be
maintained with previous editions of the DSM; and (4) no a priori constraints should be placed on the degree of
change between DSM-IV, and DSM-5” [see DSM 5-TR page 7].
The producers of the DSM-5 tested the accuracy of diagnoses of specific mental disorders by establishing
standards for inter-rater reliability. This means that you take 100 psychiatrists and psychologists and provide a set
of symptoms in a theoretical case to them and 95% of them come up with the same diagnosis using the diagnostic
criteria being tested. In addition, there was a series of field trials to empirically test the reliability of the diagnostic
criteria for various mental disorders. Finally, in 2010, a draft of the DSM-5 was subject to public commentary for a
significant period of time. The DSM-5 was approved and adopted by the APA in December 2012 and published in
2013. According to the APA, “[t]he current DSM-5 builds on the goal of its predecessors (most recently, DSM-IV-TR
or Text Revision, published in 2000) of providing guidelines for diagnoses than can inform treatment and
management decisions” [see DSM-5, p. 6]. So it took the APA 13 years to revise the DSM-IV. In fact, the APA
decided to name the DSM-5 using the number “5” rather than using the Roman Numeral “V.”
A revision committee was formed to establish the criteria for updating the DSM-5 in 2014 based on advances in the
science of the study of mental illness including “antecedent considerations such as: more recent genetic advances
that also consider similar genetic markers, family traits, temperament, and environmental exposures; concurrent
validators such as similar neural substrates, biomarkers, emotional and cognitive processing, and symptom
similarities; and predictive valuators such as similar clinical course and treatment response of an illness” [see DSM-
5 TR page 10].
In the middle of 2019, the APA started on the revision of the DSM-5 to bring it up to date as science as advanced
since 2012. The revision group was tasked to review literature that was published over the previous 10 years and to
find out of date text in the DSM-5. The DSM-5 Text Revision was published by the APA on March 18, 2022, and
corresponded with the ICD-10 and ICD-11. Note that the ICD-11 has not been adopted in the United States as of
2023 and only the ICD-9 and ICD-10 are used. Counsel can tell which ICD is used when you read the diagnostic
code(s) indicated in physician reports and billing statements.
The current version of the DSM-5 Text Revision includes an updated evaluation of scientific validity of groupings of
related mental disorders. The goal is to be able to separate group of psychiatric illness from each other “(i.e. their
ability to meaningfully separate groups of psychiatric illness from each other: neural substrates, family traits, genetic
risk factors, specific or cognitive processing, symptom similarity, course of illness, high comorbidity, and shared
treatment response” [see DSM-5 TR page 11]. The idea is to have the DSM-5 TR reflect “clinical reality” insofar that
clinicians can provide the correct diagnoses utilizing the new diagnostic criteria for specific conditions based on not
just research but on the reality of practicing psychiatry and psychology with a large group of patients and not just in
a research setting. The final revision also takes into consideration mental disorders that combine developmental
and life span considerations of separate conditions. The authors realize that some mental disorders manifest early
in life, such as neurodevelopmental disorders, schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders; followed by
diagnoses that more commonly manifest in adolescence and young adulthood, such as bipolar and related
disorders, depressive disorders, and anxiety disorders; and ends with diagnoses relevant to adulthood or later in life
such as neurocognitive disorders (Alzheimer’s and other dementia conditions) [see DSM-5 TR page 12].
Counsel should refer to the definition of what constitutes a “mental disorder” in the context of when a claim for a
“psyche” injury is alleged. The DSM definition will form the foundation of a deposition of a mental health
professional to see if the injured worker has an alleged “mental disorder.” If not, then there is no psychiatric claim.
On page 14 of the DSM-5 TR, the authors define the term “mental disorder” as follows:
Page 3 of 4
§ 9.05 DSM-5 TEXT REVISION Adopted by American Psychiatric Association and History of the DSM
A mental disorder is a syndrome characterized by clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition,
emotion regulation, or behavior that reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental
processes underlying mental functioning. Mental disorders are usually associated with significant distress or
disability in social, occupational, or other important activities. An expectable or culturally approved response to
a common stressor or loss, such as the death of a loved one, is not a mental disorder. Socially deviant
behavior (e.g. political, religious, or sexual) and conflicts that are primarily between the individual and society
are not mental disorders unless the deviance or conflict results from a dysfunction in the individual, as
described above.
The DSM-5 TR definition of a mental disorder must be read in the context of Labor Code Section 3802.3, which is
the first requirement to sustain a compensable psychiatric workers’ compensation claim. The first requirement
under Labor Code Section 3802.3 is for there to be a DSM diagnosis or a “mental disorder” that has a specific set of
diagnostic criteria that is set forth in the DSM. The DSM-5 Text Revision is the full and correct name of the DSM
effective in 2022.
So the question is: Which version of the DSM should a psychiatrist or psychologist use in our workers’
compensation cases? Are physicians obligated to use the DSM-5 TR for diagnoses made after 2022 when the
DSM-5-Text Revised edition was adopted and published by the APA? For diagnostic purposes, this author believes
that the most recent iteration of the DSM should be used unless there is a compelling reason to rely on an earlier
version. The reason for this opinion is because the current Text Revision edition of the DSM-5 is based on the most
recent world-wide medical research on mental disorders.
That research has now taken into account clinical experience, research involving inter-rater reliability in reaching
specific diagnoses, cultural bias considerations, and most importantly, clinical practices across this country and the
world. However, that being said, if a psychiatrist or psychologist uses an earlier version of the DSM, the accuracy of
a given diagnosis might be the same under that edition as well as under the DSM-5 Text Revision. Counsel should
always ask a medical-legal physician which DSM they relied on in arriving at their medical-legal conclusions in their
reports concerning the diagnosis of any mental disorders in a given case. If there is a significant difference between
the diagnostic criteria used under an older version of the DSM compared to the DSM-5 TR, then those differences
should be confronted by counsel via deposition or by interrogatory to the medical-legal physician.
The old adage “you should not argue medicine with a physician but you can argue the facts and the law with one”
may not apply in psychiatric cases. Counsel should read psyche medical-legal reports with a great deal of scrutiny
to make sure there is an accurate DSM diagnosis. That is the first step in establishing substantial medical evidence
in a psychiatric report and is mandated by Labor Code Section 3802.3(a).
Psychiatric injuries are not evaluated under AMA Guides Chapter 14. The 2005 PDRS requires use of the Global
Assessment of Functioning (GAF), which is indicated at Axis V in the DSM-IV diagnosis. The method of rating
permanent impairment for psychiatric injuries has not changed under SB 863 for industrially related psychiatric
injuries that do not fall under the limitations of Labor Code § 4660.1(c). So the description of how to rate psychiatric
impairment has not changed from the 2012 legislation. The methodology described below, therefore, applies to
mental-mental cases, mental-physical cases, and physical-mental cases in which the latter kind of case involves a
violent act or the injured employee was in the proximity of a violent act or the injured employee suffers from a
catastrophic injury. Remember, Labor Code Section 4660.1(c) prohibits compensation for permanent disability if a
psychiatric condition is caused by a physical injury with the exceptions stated earlier in this paragraph.
What has also dramatically changed is the way mental disorders are determined. Diagnostic criteria for many
conditions we see in our cases have changed effective in March 2022, when the DSM-5 Text Revision was adopted
by the American Psychiatric Association (APA). As stated above, Labor Code § 3208.3(a) mandates the use of the
DSM-III or any other nationally accepted psychiatric diagnosis criteria for the determination of a psychiatric disorder.
Axes I through V of the various diagnostic statistics manuals have existed in the DSM-III, DSM-IV, and DSM-IV Text
Revised editions from the APA. Axis V is the GAF score that is the basis of a WPI rating using the 2005 PDRS as
described below.
Page 4 of 4
§ 9.05 DSM-5 TEXT REVISION Adopted by American Psychiatric Association and History of the DSM
Why discuss specific disorders in the DSM-5 TR in this guidebook? Psychiatric claims in our workers’ compensation
cases have been more common than not. Even with the restrictions imposed on injuries occurring on or after
1/1/2013 under Labor Code § 4660.1(c), this factor has not discouraged many applicant’s counsel from routinely
including psyche as a separate and distinct alleged industrial injury. Counsel for both applicants and defendants
must become aware of the diagnostic criteria for mental disorders that we commonly see in our cases in order to
properly depose an injured worker as well as take testimony at a deposition of psychiatrists and psychologists.
In fact, many recent medical reports from mental health professionals reflect that the evaluator or treating physician
is still using the diagnostic criteria from the DSM-IV, which may, with some diagnostic criteria missing from the
diagnosis, cause the doctor’s conclusions not to constitute substantial evidence. Can you imagine bringing up at a
deposition of an AME in psychiatry that he or she used the wrong diagnostic criteria for PTSD in a case because
the physician failed to utilize the proper current diagnostic criteria for that disorder? This is bound to occur for some
mental disorders since the diagnostic criteria in the DSM-IV was in existence as of 2000 while the DSM-5 is based
on research on mental disorders through May 2013, a 13-year learning curve. In medicine, 13 years of research is
an eternity. And today, in 2023, the DSM-5 Text Revision is published nine years after the original DSM-5 was
published.
Applicants’ attorneys may argue that a mental disorder that is due to another medical condition (such as a failed
lumbar syndrome) involves alteration of the dopamine system in the brain, utilizing the biological based theory of
mental disorder causation. Arguably, this becomes more of an organic neurological condition than a psyche
condition. If that does not work, then the applicant’s attorney will argue that a person with a clinical depression
under the DSM-5 TR, coupled with a medical condition such as a failed lumbar syndrome, has a “catastrophic
injury” under Labor Code § 4660.1 thereby allowing for permanent disability for the mental disorder, despite it being
caused by a physical injury. Defense attorneys will argue that a psyche case is a psyche case—any psychiatric
impairment that comes from a physical injury is excluded under Labor Code § 4660.1(c). In addition, defense
counsel will argue that the injury itself has to be catastrophic, such as an amputation or traumatic brain injury, and
not catastrophic as a result of failed treatment of a physical injury
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.06
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.06 Elimination of Axes I through V; Introduction of World Health
Organization Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS)
Many scholars are saying that the DMS-5 was a revolutionary change from prior editions of the Diagnostic Statistics
Manual of Mental Disorders. Among the changes is the total elimination of the use of Axes I through V and,
specifically, the elimination of a GAF scoring system. What does this change do to our method of rating psychiatric
permanent disability under the 2005 and 2013 PDRS? The WCAB and appellate courts will have to make that
decision.
On pages 15-16 of the DSM-5, the authors state:
Despite widespread use and its adoption by certain insurance and governmental agencies, the multi-axial
system in DSM-IV was not required to make a mental disorder diagnosis … . DSM-5 has moved to a non-axial
documentation of diagnosis (formerly Axes I, II, and III), with separate notations for important psychosocial and
contextual factors (formerly Axis IV) and disability (formerly Axis V).
DSM-IV Axis V consisted for the Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) scale, representing the clinician’s
judgment of the individual’s overall level of ‘functioning on a hypothetical continuum of mental health-illness.’ It
was recommended that the GAF be dropped from DSM-5 for several reasons, including its conceptual lack of
clarity (i.e. including symptoms, suicide risk, and disabilities in its descriptors) and questionable psychometrics
in routine practice. In order to provide a global measure of disability, the World Health Organization Disability
Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) is included, for further study, in Section III of the DSM-5 (see the
chapter “Assessment Measures”). The WHODAS 2.0 is based on the International Classification of
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) for use across all of medicine and health care.
The APA has continued to reject the multiaxial system of Axis I, Axis II, Axis III, Axis IV, and Axis V in the DSM-5
Text Revision [see pages 15-16 of the DSM-5 TR].
The WHODAS-2.0 can be found on pages 854 through 857 of the DSM-5 Text Revision. The WHODAS has not
been adopted by the Administrative Director to substitute for the 2005 PDRS GAF-WPI methodology of determining
whole person impairment due to a psychiatric condition. Plus its methodology has not been adopted here in the
United States. However, the WHODAS 2.0 is worth discussing here since the Schedule is evidence based, peer
reviewed, and accepted internationally for use in determining psychiatric “disability.” The WHODAS 2.0 can be used
as an alternative rating method to rebut a WPI rating that is based on the GAF score under the DSM-IV. In reading
the description of the development of the WHODAS 2.0, it appears that the evaluation of disability is similar to what
the original intent of the GAF score was in prior editions of the DSM—to evaluate a person’s personal, occupational,
and social functioning at the beginning of treatment, during treatment, and upon discharge from treatment.
The WHODAS 2.0 consists of 36 questions in six categories that can either be self-administered or performed by a
treating or evaluating physician. The six categories are cognition (understanding and communicating), mobility
(getting around), self-care, getting along with people, life activities such as household chores, work, and/or school
activities, and participation in society. The version of the WHODAS 2.0 that is administered by a physician can be
found at pages 856-857.
Page 2 of 3
§ 9.06 Elimination of Axes I through V; Introduction of World Health Organization Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS)
Each of the 36 questions are rated by the examiner or self-report on a scale of how much difficulty the patient has in
these six areas of functioning on a 1 to 5 scale with 1 being no impairment, 2 being mild, 3 being moderate, 4 being
severe and 5 being “extreme or cannot do.” There are three scoring methods suggested—one simple for clinical
purposes, the second to determine a disability level on a scale of 0 = no disability to 100 = total disability using a
computer model, and the third a mathematical average (which is suggested for use in the United States). The
“simple scoring method” requires adding up the raw scores and there is no weighting of individual categories. The
DSM-5-TR refers to this method as useful to use—the “simple scores of the items across all domains constitutes a
statistic that is sufficient to describe the degree of functional limitations” [see DSM-5-TR pp. 856-7].
Hypothetically, if a person is “severe or cannot do” for each of the 36 questions, then they have a maximum 180
points of severity (5 × 36) or 100% impairment or disability. If a person has no impairment for each of the 36
questions, then their severity score is 36 (1 × 36) which would, presumably, be no impairment or disability. As
pointed out in the DSM-5, the WHODAS 2.0 is not scaled or weighted to each of the six categories or domains,
which means that each domain is no more important than the next. But even without weighing each of the six
domains, you can convert mathematically a 36 to 180 point scale to match a scale of 0% WPI impairment rating to a
100% WPI psychiatric rating.
The DSM-5-TR refers to a “complex” method of scoring disability using the WHODAS 2.0 schedule called “item
response theory based scoring.” The scoring gives weight to each category and the severity of impairment for each
category and is based on a computer program that you can obtain from the WHO website. The scoring has three
steps:
Step 1: Summing of recorded item scores within each category
Step 2: Summing all six category scores
Step 3: Converting the summary score into a metric ranging from 0 = no disability to 100 = total disability
On page 854-855 of the DSM-5, the authors recommend “calculation and use of average scores for each domain
(category) and for general disability. The average scores are comparable to the WHODAS 5-point scale which
allows the clinician to think of the individual’s disability in terms of none (1), mild (2), moderate (3), severe (4), or
extreme (5). The average domain and general disability scores were found to be reliable, easy to use, and clinically
useful to the clinicians in the DSM-5 field trials.”
The third method of determining a disability under the WHODAS 2.0 is specifically for use in the United States and
can possibly be a vital alternative rating method to rebut a WPI rating that is based on the GAF score under the
DSM-IV and 2005 PDRS. As an alternative to using the WHODAS computer calculator, the DSM-5-TR goes on to
say:
The average domain score is calculated by dividing the raw domain score by the number of items in the
domain (e.g. if all of the items within the ‘understanding and communicating’ domain are rated as being
moderate then the average domain score would be 18/6 = 3, indicating moderate disability. The average
general disability score is calculated by dividing the raw overall score by the number of items in the measure
(i.e. 36).
For example, if the average of the 6 domain score for each category was “moderate” or a 3, then 6 × 3 = 18 and
18/36 = a “moderate” disability or a 50% disability. Or if each of the questions was answered with a “1,” the overall
added score divided by the number of raw questions would be 36/36 or “no impairment” because the overall score
would be 1 on the scale of 1 to 5. The scores can be manipulated as long as they make sense and provide an
accurate overall assessment of the person’s functional impairment in each of the six categories. A physician would
have to describe the mathematical method used as suggested by the DSM-5-TR on page 854.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 3 of 3
§ 9.06 Elimination of Axes I through V; Introduction of World Health Organization Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS)
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.07
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.07 Other Alternative WPI Rating Methods
Are there other alternative methods of evaluating permanent psychiatric disability other than use of the GAF-WPI
method mandated in the 2005 PDRS? Another possibility is to tie the work function impairment analysis that is on
page 365 of the AMA Guides 5th Edition and an analysis of ADL functioning in Table 1-2 on page 4 with Table 13-8
Emotional or Behavioral Disorders. That method and others like it have been used to rebut a rating using the GAF-
WPI formula described below. However, so far, there is no case law on the validity of these alternative methods of
rating. Perhaps alternative methods of rating psychiatric impairment will emerge out of the elimination of the GAF
rubric in the DSM-5. Certainly, with the elimination of the GAF score in the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR psychiatrists and
psychologists will have an easier time rebutting a WPI rating that is based on the GAF score alone since that rubric
is now clinically obsolete
In the course of your becoming familiar with the DSM-5 TR, you need to learn some of the new terminology that is
used to describe risk factors for certain individuals developing a mental disorder such as depression, anxiety, panic
attacks and the like. For example, you will see the term “neuroticism”, which if you are old-school like the author,
you would refer to someone who is “neurotic.” However, that term has been obsolete in the psychiatry and
psychology lexicon. In the current era, the term “neuroticism” means “negative affectivity” or that a person has a
“proneness to experiencing negative emotions.” We all know someone like that—he or she will feel negatively and
complain even if he or she wins the lottery. Seriously, people who feel negative thoughts most of the time are the
most at risk of developing a clinical depressive or anxiety disorder. See, e.g., page 317 of the DSM-5 TR under
“Temperamental” for acute stress disorder, or on page 189 for major depressive disorder.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.08
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.08 Pain Disorders
One significant example of the changes from the DSM-IV TR to the DSM-5 is the fact that Pain Disorders that are
listed in the DSM-IV TR were eliminated from the DSM-5. What does the APA do with pain disorders in the DSM-5
TR? In our law practices, we often see a chronic pain syndrome emerge in an otherwise straightforward orthopedic
injury. Here is a quick synopsis of that issue as the DSM-5 TR begins to circulate in the mental health and legal
arenas.
Pain disorders are now included within new diagnostic criteria called Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders. The
common feature of this disorder category is that individuals have “somatic symptoms associated with significant
distress and impairment.” The introduction to this new disorder includes the description of the diagnosis is to be
made “on the basis of positive symptoms and signs (distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors in response to these symptoms) rather than the absence of a medical explanation for
somatic complaints” [see DSM-5 TR p. 349].
This is not to say that every pain disorder results in a mental diagnosis, let alone one that is described in the
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders category. Many pain disorders do have a medical explanation for
symptoms, such as arachnoiditis from failed lumbar surgery, or complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS Type 1 or
Type 2), which have independent medical diagnostic criteria of their own.
However, the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR authors agree that if there is a somatic component (as opposed to an
objective explanation) for chronic pain, then the “somatic component adds severity and complexity to depressive
and anxiety disorders and results in higher severity, functional impairment, and even refractoriness to traditional
treatments” [see DSM-5 TR p. 350].
The DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR authors also have included “psychological factors affecting other medical conditions” as
part of the new rubric of Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders. The essential feature of psychological factors
affecting other medical conditions “is the presence of one or more clinically significant psychological or behavioral
factors that adversely affect a medical condition by increasing the risk for suffering, death, or disability” [see DSM-5
TR p. 350].
The term “chronic pain” is mentioned in the DSM-5 only a few times, including on page 813 of the DSM-5, which
states: “Some individuals with chronic pain would be appropriately diagnosed as having somatic symptom disorder,
with predominant pain. For others, psychological factors affecting other medical conditions or an adjustment
disorder would be more appropriate.” As was true in the DSM-IV TR, you have to read the specific diagnostic
criteria for Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders, psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, and
adjustment disorder to determine which diagnostic criteria is the most accurate in a given case. See also page 355
of the DSM-5 TR.
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders have three categories—A, B, and C—that provide the diagnosis.
Category A requires “[o]ne or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily
life” and requires the diagnostician to specify “with predominant pain.” Category B requires “[e]xcessive thoughts,
feelings or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms” as manifested by at least one of the following: “…
[d]isproportionate and persistent [severe symptoms lasting for more than 6 months] thoughts about the seriousness
of one’s symptoms”; “… [p]ersistently high level of anxiety about health or symptoms”; or “… [e]xcessive time and
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.08 Pain Disorders
energy devoted to these symptoms or health concerns.” The Category B symptoms must be described as mild,
moderate or severe as defined on page 351 of the DSM-5 TR. Category C requires somatic symptoms to last at
least six months [see DSM-5 p. 351].
Attorneys will have to first determine whether there is any objective evidence of a pain disorder. If there is, then a
mental disorder diagnosis may not be applicable, or one may exist concurrently with a pain disorder that is
supported by objective evidence, e.g., traumatic amputation of a hand. If there is no objective evidence of a pain
disorder, then the diagnostic criteria on page 351 of the DSM-5 TR may apply. Counsel must make sure that a
clinician who diagnoses a pain disorder evaluate the case using the Somatic Symptom Disorder criteria and, as the
text advises, also evaluate a case using the diagnostic criteria separately for adjustment disorders and
psychological factors affecting a medical condition [see DSM-5 TR p. 355].
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.09
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.09 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Under the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR
The diagnostic criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) have changed in the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR
compared to prior editions of the DSM. Counsel should become aware of the substantial changes to the diagnostic
criteria from the DSM-IV to the DSM-5 since many physicians are not yet fully familiar with the DSM-5 diagnostic
criteria. The APA retained most of the diagnostic criteria for PTSD in the DSM-5 TR, but counsel is strongly advised
to refer to the current version of the diagnostic criteria in the DSM-5 TR starting on page 295. The purpose of this
section is to provide a framework for counsel to depose physicians in cases in which PTSD may have occurred, and
for counsel for injured workers to recognize the signs, symptoms, and complaints that present when some clients
suffer the consequences of a traumatic event.
The first factor to point out is that in many cases, treating physicians do not even recognize the existence of PTSD
in some patients because the concentration medically is on treating the injured worker’s physical injuries, which
often times are life threatening. The best example is a case of a tree surgeon supervisor who fell off of a two-story
roof and sustained severe traumatic injuries to his leg, back, hip, and arm. He required weeks of hospitalization,
orthopedic surgeries, and physical rehabilitation. What the treating physicians missed was the fact that the injured
worker also sustained a traumatic brain injury in the fall when he hit the ground.
The fact that a traumatic brain injury occurred in this case did not come to light until one year after the date of injury
when the injured worker sought legal counsel for the first time in his workers’ compensation claim. At that time, the
attorney noticed that the injured worker’s wife was his spokesman for the entire initial interview. The injured worker
was jumpy, depressed, angry, and forgetful, and according to his wife, he had changed his behavior since the
accident. Eventually neurological and psychiatric work-ups revealed two separate undiagnosed conditions that were
caused by the fall off the roof—a traumatic brain injury and PTSD. The tragic part of this case besides the actual
physical injuries, is that for one year the injured worker’s PTSD and TBI went undiagnosed and untreated. If PTSD
is not timely diagnosed and treated, the signs, symptoms, and complaints become entrenched and the condition is
all but untreatable.
So the lesson here is for counsel to become aware of this significant and devastating psychiatric condition that can
occur even without a physical injury to the employee. We know that 20% of returning soldiers from Iraq and
Afghanistan have clinical PTSD. That is 300,000 people who are entering the work force nationwide. Even without
considering returning soldiers, PTSD is prevalent in our cases but is probably underdiagnosed.
PTSD is associated with high levels of social, occupational, and physical disability, as well as considerable
economic costs and high levels of medical utilization … In community and veteran samples, PTSD is associated
with poor social and family relationships, absenteeism from work, lower income, and lower educational and
occupational success. [see DSM-5TR pp.305-310].
The diagnostic criteria for PTSD in the DSM-5 TR have 8 factors [see DSM-5 TR pp.301-304]:
A. Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence by:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event, or
2. Witnessing in person the event as it occurs to others, or
Page 2 of 4
§ 9.09 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Under the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR
3. Learning that the traumatic event (violence or accident) occurred to a family member or close friend. In
cases of actual or threatened death of a family member or friend, the event(s) must have been violent
of accidental or
4. Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the traumatic event(s) (e.g., first
responders collecting human remains; police officers repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse)
Note: Criterion A-4 does not apply to exposure through electronic media, television, movies, or
pictures, unless this exposure is work related.
B. Presence of one or more of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the traumatic event(s),
beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s) [note involving
children omitted here];
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are related to the traumatic
event(s) [note involving children omitted here];
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual fees ir acts as if the traumatic event(s)
were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a continuum with the most extreme expression being a
complete loss of awareness or present surroundings) [note about children omitted];
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or
resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s);
5. Marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the
traumatic event(s).
C. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s)
occurred, as evidenced by one of both of the following:
1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated
with the traumatic event(s).
2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places, conversations, activities, objects,
situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the
traumatic events.
D. Negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the traumatic event(s) beginning or worsening
after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of the following:
1. Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event(s) (typically due to dissociative amnesia
and not to other factors such as head injury, alcohol, or drugs).
2. Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others, or the world (e.g., “I
am bad,” “No one can be trusted,” “The world is completely dangerous,” “My whole nervous system is
completely ruined.”)
3. Persistent distorted cognitions about the cause or consequences of the traumatic event(s) that lead the
individual to blame himself/herself, or others.
4. Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame).
5. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities.
6. Feelings of detachment or estrangement from others.
7. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to experience happiness, satisfaction,
or loving feelings).
E. Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening
after the traumatic event(s) occurred as evidence by two or more of the following:
Page 3 of 4
§ 9.09 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Under the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR
1. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed as verbal or
physical aggression toward people or objects.
2. Reckless or self-destructive behavior.
3. Hypervigilance.
4. Exaggerated startle response.
5. Problems with concentration.
6. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).
F. Duration of disturbance (Criteria B, C, D, and E) is more than 1 month.
G. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
H. The disturbance is not due to the physiological effects of a substance such as medication, alcohol or another
medical condition.
Like with any diagnosis in any edition of the DSM, there may be “sub-types” of a disorder once a patient meets the
diagnostic criteria for the primary condition. Sub-types for PTSD are indicated on page 303 of the DSM-5 TR. The
differences between the DSM-5 and the DSM-5 TR for PTSD are significant, mainly reflecting more detailed
diagnostic criteria to constitute the diagnosis. In addition, there is a separate diagnostic criteria for PTSD for
children six years and younger.
In the DSM-5 TR, the authors describe under the section called “Diagnostic Features” that “the clinical presentation
of PTSD varies.” The authors refer to specific examples of traumatic events that can cause PTSD to “include but
not limited to” exposure to war as a combatant or civilian, threatened or actual physical assault (e.g. physical attack,
robbery, mugging, child abuse), threatened or actual sexual violence (including being drugged first), being
kidnapped, being taken hostage, terrorist attack, torture, incarceration as a prisoner of war, natural or human made
disasters, and severe motor vehicle accidents. “Medical incidents that qualify as traumatic events involve sudden
catastrophic events (waking during surgery, anaphylactic shock)” [see DSM-5 TR p.305].
The authors identify examples of “witnessed events to include but not be limited to” observing threatened or serious
injury, unnatural death, physical or sexual abuse of another person due to violent assault, domestic violence,
accident, war, or disaster. Indirect exposure through learning about an event is limited to experiences affecting
close relatives or friends and experiences that are violent or accidental to include personal assault, suicide, serious
accident, and serious injury. “The disorder may be especially severe or long lasting when the stressor is
interpersonal and intentional [see DSM-5 TR p.p.305-308].
The traumatic event can be re-experienced by recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive recollection of the event by
dreams, flashbacks of the event, intense psychological or physiological distress, and with deliberate efforts by the
patient to avoid thinking, talking about, or re-living the event. Negative alterations in cognitions or mood associated
with the event begin or worsen after exposure to the event and the patient may experience marked diminished
interest or participation in previously enjoyed activities, and become estranged from other people. Some patients
with PTSD may be quick tempered and may engage in aggressive verbal or physical behavior with little or no
provocation. “PTSD is often characterized by a heightened sensitivity to potential threats, including those that are
related to the traumatic experience and to those that are not related to the traumatic event … Individuals with PTSD
may be very reactive to unexpected stimuli, displaying a heightened startle response, or jumpiness, to loud noises,
or unexpected movements. Concentration difficulties, including difficulty remembering daily events or attending to
focused tasks are commonly reported … Problems with sleep onset and maintenance are common and may be
associated with nightmares …” [see DSM-5 TR pp. 305-308].
PTSD can occur at any age and the diagnostic criteria indicated above apply to anyone over the age of six years.
Symptoms of PTSD usually begin within the first three months after the trauma although there can be a delay of
months or years before the diagnostic criteria of PTSD are met. The DSM-IV called the delayed version of PTSD
Page 4 of 4
§ 9.09 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Under the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR
“delayed onset” and the DSM-5 now calls it “delayed expression” because current research shows that some
criteria of PTSD occurs immediately while there may be a delay in meeting full diagnostic criteria (i.e., all 9 A
through H criteria being met).
The duration of PTSD also varies—one-half of adults with PTSD recover entirely within three months from the
traumatic event. The other half of adults with PTSD may recover longer than 12 months and have symptoms of
PTSD for over 50 years. The aging process with declining health can exacerbate the symptoms of PTSD. Risk
factors for the occurrence of PTSD include previous traumatic events in childhood, especially under six years of
age, prior mental disorders as an adult, lower socio-economic status, lower education, and lower intelligence.
Female gender and younger age for traumatic event, as well as family psychiatric history are additional risk factors.
Interestingly, social support prior to the traumatic event is protective against PTSD. Finally, the severity of the
trauma (the “dose of the trauma”) is associated with the greater likelihood of PTSD [see DSM-5 TR pp.309-310].
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.10
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.10 Adjustment Disorders
The adjustment disorders are now categorized in the DSM-5 TR under the same category as PTSD—“Trauma and
Stressor Related Disorders” and is no longer under Depression. The diagnostic criteria for adjustment disorders are
basically the same as they have been under prior editions of the DSM. However, a quick description of the disorder
is appropriate here since we see so many workers’ compensation claims that include the diagnosis of an
adjustment disorder after an on the job injury.
The diagnosis for an adjustment disorder has A, B, C, D, and E criteria as follows [see DSM-5 TR pp.319-322]:
A. The development of emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an identifiable stressor(s) occurring
within 3 months of the onset of the stressor(s).
B. These symptoms or behaviors are clinically significant, as evidenced by one or both of the following:
a. Marked distress that is out of proportion to the severity or intensity of the stressor taking into account the
external context and cultural factors that might influence symptom severity and presentation;
b. Significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The stress-related disturbance does not meet the criteria for another mental disorder and is not merely an
exacerbation of a preexisting mental disorder.
D. The symptoms do not represent normal bereavement and are not better explained by prolonged grief
disorder.
E. Once the stressor or its consequences have terminated, the symptoms do not persist for more than an
additional six months. The clinician has to specify the type of adjustment disorder is involved:
a. With depressed mood (low mood, tearfulness, feelings of hopelessness are predominant)
b. With anxiety (Nervousness, worry, jitteriness, or separation anxiety is predominant)
c. With mixed anxiety and depressed mood
d. With disturbance of conduct
e. With mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct
f. Unspecified (maladaptive reactions)
There may be a single stressor (break up of a relationship) or multiple stressors (loss of a job and marriage
problems). Stressors may be recurrent or continuous “e.g. a persistent painful illness with increasing disability” [see
DSM-5 TR p.320]. There is an increased risk of suicide attempts and completed suicide in these patients.
Adjustment disorders can become persistent and last over six months and can be associated with another medical
condition. “Adjustment disorders are common accompaniments of medical illness and may be the major
psychological response to a medical disorder” [see DSM-5 TR p. 320].
It appears that the DSM-5 TR carries over from prior editions of the DSM that adjustment disorders can last more
than six months even though the E category states that the duration of the condition is six months or less from the
onset of symptoms. The text describes but does not define a “persistent adjustment disorder” anywhere in the
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.10 Adjustment Disorders
notations or diagnostic criteria. We have seen in our cases this diagnosis repeatedly over the years, and it appears
that many times this diagnosis ends up becoming a major depressive or persistent depressive disorder instead.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.11
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.11 Depression
By far, the most common psychiatric disorder we see in our cases involves a diagnosis of “major depression, single
episode,” “major depression, recurrent,” “major depression, NOS [not otherwise specified].” More often than not, a
depression emerges in an injured worker after a physical injury occurs. The complexities of depression almost
always complicate recovery from physical injuries. Depression is a very serious comorbidity (disease process) with
physical injuries that are work related.
In virtually all versions of the DSM, once a person has a psychiatric diagnosis, including any kind of depression, that
diagnosis never goes away, even if the mental condition is in remission. The reason is that research indicates that
once a person has met the diagnostic criteria for a mental disorder, it will either cause active symptoms or will go
into remission with a high probability of recurrence during the person’s lifetime. In fact, depression is itself
commonly recurrent in most patients. What does the DSM-5 say about it? What does the DSM-5 TR say about it?
In the DSM-5, Depressive Disorders have been separated from the previous chapter “Bipolar and Related
Disorders,” which were all under one chapter in the DSM-IV. All of these disorders have common symptoms—sad,
empty, or irritable mood, accompanied by somatic and cognitive changes that significantly affect the person’s ability
to function. Depressive Disorders that we see in our cases include major depressive disorder (including major
depressive episode), dysthymia, which is a persistent depressive disorder, medication-induced depressive disorder,
depressive disorder due to a medical condition, other specified depressive disorder, and unspecified depressive
disorder.
For the record, based on current research, premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMS) is now included within the DSM-
5 and DSM-5 TR rather than in the appendix of the DSM-IV. Twenty years of research on this condition “has
confirmed a specific and treatment-responsive form of depressive disorder begins sometime following ovulation and
remits within a few days of menses and has a marked impact on functioning” [see DSM-5 TR p. 197].
A Major Depressive Disorder has five diagnostic criteria classified under Categories A, B, C, D, and E [see DSM-5
TR pp. 183-184]:
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same two-week period and represent
a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood, or (2) loss
of interest or pleasure. Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical
condition.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day as indicated by either subjective report (e.g., feels
sad, empty, hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g., appears tearful) [additional note for
children omitted].
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all activities most of the day, nearly every day
(as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than 5% of body weight in
a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every day [note for children omitted].
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
Page 2 of 5
§ 9.11 Depression
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others, not merely feelings of
restlessness or being slowed down).
6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delusional) nearly every day
(not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (either by subjective
account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or
a suicide attempt, or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to physiological effects of a substance or to another medical condition.
[THE A–C CRITERIA REPRESENT A MAJOR DEPRESSIVE EPISODE]
There is a new note in the DSM-5 TR that states on page 183: Responses to a significant loss (e.g.,
bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may
include the feelings of intense sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss
noted in Criterion A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be
understandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode in
addition to the normal response to a significant loss should also be carefully considered. This decision
inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s history and the cultural norms
for the expression of distress in the context of loss.
D. At least one major depressive episode is not better explained by schizoaffective disorder, and is not
superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified and
unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
E. There has never been a manic or hypomanic episode. Note: This exclusion does not apply if all of the manic-
like or hypomanic-like episodes are substance-induced or are attributable to the physiological effects of
another medical condition.
There is an excellent explanation of the difference between grief or bereavement and a major depression caused by
a single episode in footnote 1 on page 184  of the DSM-5 TR.
Major depressive disorder is a classic condition we see in our cases and is characterized by “discrete episodes of at
least two weeks duration, although most episodes last a lot longer, involving clear-cut changes in affect, cognition,
and neuro-vegetative functions and inter-episode remissions. A diagnosis based on a single episode is possible,
although the disorder is a recurrent one in a majority of cases” [see DSM-5 TR p.185]. The severity of the disorder
can range from mild to moderate to severe to include psychotic features; and can be characterized to be in partial
or total remission.
The essential feature of a major depressive episode is a period of at least two weeks during which there is either
depressed mood or the loss of interest or pleasure in nearly all activities. In addition, there has to be at least four
other symptoms from the list above in Section A for the diagnosis to be valid. See pages 185 through 189 of the
DSM-5 TR for an excellent discussion of each of the elements of the diagnostic criteria. Some elements can be
based on self-report while others require a third-party such as a family member to confirm the symptom, e.g.,
psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day.
The DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR have indicated that current research has not resulted in a blood test for depression
even though the literature supports neurophysiological, neuroanatomical, and neuro-endocrinological correlation
with major depression. In fact, there is a strong link between hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hyperactivity
associated with severe depression that can result in psychosis and suicide. Major depression occurs annually in
Page 3 of 5
§ 9.11 Depression
about 7% of the population with a 3:1.5 ratio of women to men and ages 18 to 29 years being the most vulnerable—
three times the occurrence for people over 60 years of age.
Very few people with major depression go into remission which is defined in the DSM-5 as “a period of 2 or more
months with no symptoms, or only one or two symptoms to no more than a mild degree” [see DSM-5 TR p.188].
Some patients experience no symptoms between discrete episodes of depression. Recovery usually begins within
3 months of onset for 40% of patients with major depression and within 1 year for 80% of patients. If the diagnosis
is made relatively quickly after the onset of symptoms and treatment occurs, then it is more likely that the
depression will end spontaneously. Lower recovery rates occur in patients who are delayed diagnosed, delayed in
treatment, or who have severe symptoms or also have an anxiety disorder as a co-morbidity.
People who have a “negative personality” (called “neuroticism”) or who have a first degree relative with major
depression are at high risk of also developing major depression. There is a strong link between childhood trauma
and adult onset major depression. Most important for our cases, the DSM-5 says: “Chronic or disabling medical
conditions also increase risks for major depressive episodes. Such prevalent illnesses as diabetes, morbid obesity,
and cardiovascular disease are often complicated by depressive episodes, and these episodes are more likely to
become chronic than are depressive episodes in medically healthy individuals” [see DSM-5 TR p.189].
Functional consequences of major depressive disorders range from very mild impairment of function (people who
interact with the depressed person cannot tell he or she is depressed) to very severe involving total incapacity such
that the depressed person is unable to attend to basic self-care needs. “Among individuals seen in general medical
settings those with major depressive disorder have more pain and physical illness and greater decreases in
physical, social, and role functioning” [see DSM-5 TR pp.188-189].
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) is a separate diagnosis in the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR from major
depression disorder. The diagnostic criteria for Dysthymia have 8 diagnostic criteria—A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H
[see DSM-5 TR pp. 193-197]:
A. Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, As indicated by either subjective account or
observation by others, for at least 2 years. [Note on children omitted]
B. Presence while depressed of two (or more) of the following:
a. Poor appetite or overeating
b. Insomnia or hypersomnia
c. Low energy or fatigue
d. Low self-esteem
e. Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions
f. Feelings of hopelessness
C. During the 2 year period of disturbance, the individual has never been without the symptoms in criteria A and
B for more than 2 months at a time.
D. Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 years.
E. There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.
F. The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional
disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
G. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
medication), or another medical condition (e.g., hypothyroidism).
H. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
Page 4 of 5
§ 9.11 Depression
The distinctive difference between a major depressive disorder and Dysthymia is that a person who has Dysthymia
(persistent depressive disorder) has made the symptoms a way of life which become part of the individual’s day-to-
day experience. Although Dysthymia and major depressive disorder are separate and distinct diagnoses, a person
could have both conditions occurring at the same time or at different times. The important difference is that a
person with Dysthymia has had persistent symptoms for at least two years with no periods of remission in between.
The annual diagnosis rate for Dysthymia is .5% of the U.S. population.
Most people who develop Dysthymia do so at an early age—in early adulthood or earlier with the development of
symptoms insidiously. Childhood risk factors include the loss of a parent or parental separation. Functional
consequences of Dysthymia can be the same or greater than that of major depressive disorder [see DSM-5 TR pp.
194-195].
Substance/Medication Induced Depressive Disorder has five diagnostic criteria—A, B, C, D, and E [see DSM-5 TR
pp. 201-208]:
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized
by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all activities.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical exam, of lab findings of both (1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication or withdrawal or after
exposure to or withdrawal from a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Criterion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive disorder that is not substance/medication-induced.
Such evidence of an independent depressive disorder could include the following:
The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms persist for a substantial
period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there
is other evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
The DSM-5 TR lists as categories of substances/medications to include alcohol, phencyclidine, other hallucinogens,
inhalants, opioids, sedatives, hypnotics (sleeping medication such as Ambien, Lunesta), or anxiolytics
(benzodiazepines), amphetamines or other stimulants, cocaine, or “other.” See Ch. 8, § 8.07 of this guidebook for a
list of the brand names and generics of opioids, benzodiazepines, and hypnotics.
In this diagnosis, depressive symptoms have to be associated with the ingestion, injection, or inhalation of
medication of a drug of abuse, toxin, psychotropic medication, or other medication, and the depressive symptoms
persist beyond the expected length of physiological effects, intoxication, or withdrawal period. The literature is clear
that stimulants, steroids, antibiotics, central nervous system drugs, dermatological agents, chemotherapeutic drugs,
immunological agents can induce depressive mood disturbances. This is why when an injured worker is claiming a
psychiatric injury, either directly or as a compensable consequence of a physical injury, counsel must determine
what medication the injured worker has been taking before, during, and after the onset of depressive symptoms. In
Social Security Disability hearings where mental disorders are alleged, side effects of medication are always
discussed with the judge, physician expert, and vocational experts. The DSM-5 TR cautions that there could be co-
morbidities—a medication induced depression can occur at the same time as any other depressive disorder
independently from the medication-related condition.
In light of utilization reviews and independent medical reviews that are requiring reduction of morphine equivalent
dosages from 120mg MED to 70 MED, it will be no surprise for us to see more cases in which an injured worker
develops a depression caused by medication (or a lack thereof). The DSM-5 TR specifically states: “The withdrawal
Page 5 of 5
§ 9.11 Depression
state for some substances can be relatively protracted, and thus intense depressive symptoms can last for a long
period after the cessation of substance use” [see DSM-5 TR p. 204].
The DSM-5 TR also describes the current debate of whether certain anti-depressants cause an increase in suicide
risk among some patients [see DSM-5 TR p. 204]. The epidemiology of substance/medication induced depressive
disorder were more likely to be male, black, high school diploma or less, no insurance, and to have a lower family
income. There is higher incidence of family substance abuse, higher 12-month history of stressful life events and a
greater number of major depressive disorder criterion.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition has five diagnostic criteria—A, B, C, D, and E [see DSM-5
TR pp.206-209]:
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized
by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical exam, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct
pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g. adjustment disorder, with depressed
mood, in which the stressor is a serious medical condition).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
In this condition, the clinician must establish that the mood disturbance is etiologically related to the general medical
condition through a physiological mechanism. “The listing of the medical conditions that are said to be able to
induce major depression is never complete, and the clinician’s best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis” [see
DSM-5 TR p. 206]. The DSM-5 TR specifically identifies strokes, Huntington’s Disease, Parkinson’s Disease,
traumatic brain injury, Cushing’s disease, hypothyroidism, multiple sclerosis. The DSM-5 TR advises that when in
doubt, the doctor should diagnose Adjustment Disorder with depressed mood.
The section in the DSM-5 TR on Adjustment Disorders basically refer to “watered down” versions of major
depressive disorders and Dysthymia. But adjustment disorders are not included under depressive disorders, they
are listed under trauma and stress related disorders and are discussed above.
The remaining depressive disorders in the DSM-5 TR that include “Other Specified Depressive Disorder” and
“Unspecified Depressive Disorder” are diagnoses based on the fact that the individual does not meet any of the
other types of depressive disorders, i.e., major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder, or
substance/medication induced depressive disorder. These types of depression cause disturbances in social,
occupational, or other important functions but are not as severe in symptoms or last as long as the other more
specific categories of depressive disorders. This could include patients who have brief periods of depression, short
term episodes (less than 14 days duration of symptoms), or not enough symptoms to justify another scheduled
diagnosis.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.12
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.12 Anxiety Disorders
In the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR, the APA decided to separate anxiety disorders from being a symptom of a depressive
disorder since in many patients, anxiety directly causes the symptoms in the absence of the diagnostic criteria for a
depressive disorder. However, it is clear that severe levels of an anxiety disorder can cause as much negative
effect on a person’s personal, occupational, and social functioning as a severe depressive disorder [see DSM-5 TR
pp.215-216].
In this guidebook, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Substance/Medication Induced Anxiety Disorder, and Panic
Disorder will be described and discussed. For a more complete discussion of all known anxiety disorders, you
should refer directly to the DSM-5 TR, pages 215 through 261.
Generalized Anxiety Disorders are characterized by five diagnostic criteria—A, B, C, D, E, and F [see DSM-5 TR
pp.250-251]:
A. Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation) occurring more days than not for at least 6 months,
about a number of events or activities (such as work or school performance).
B. The individual finds it hard to control the worry.
C. The anxiety and worry are associated with three or more of the following six symptoms (with at least some
symptoms having been present for more days than not for the past 6 months):
a. Restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge
b. Being easily fatigued
c. Difficulty concentrating or mind going blank
d. Irritability
e. Muscle tension
f. Sleep disturbance (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or restless, unsatisfying sleep.
D. The anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
E. The anxiety is not attributable to the physiological effect of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or a
medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
F. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., anxiety or worry about having panic
attacks in panic disorder, negative evaluation in social anxiety disorder, contamination or other obsessions
in obsessive-compulsive disorder, separation from attachment figures in separation anxiety disorder,
reminders of traumatic events in posttraumatic stress disorder, gaining weight in anorexia nervosa,
physical complaints in somatic symptom disorder, perceived appearance flaws in body dysmorphic
disorder, having a serious illness in illness anxiety disorder, or the content of delusional beliefs in
schizophrenia or delusional disorder).
The essential aspect of an anxiety disorder is an evaluation of the intensity, duration, or frequency of the anxiety or
worry that is out of proportion to the actual likelihood or impact of the anticipated event. The individual finds it
Page 2 of 3
§ 9.12 Anxiety Disorders
difficult to control the worry and to keep worrisome thoughts from interfering with attention to tasks at hand. During
the course of the disorder, the focus of the worry may shift from one concern to another.
The DSM-5 TR distinguishes everyday worry from an anxiety disorder by stating [see DSM-5 TR pp.251]:
Several features distinguish generalized anxiety disorder from non-pathological anxiety. First the worries
associated with generalized anxiety disorder are excessive and typically interfere significantly with
psychosocial functioning, whereas worries of everyday life are not excessive and are perceived as more
manageable and may be put off then more pressing matters arise. Second, the worries associated with
generalized anxiety disorder are more pervasive, pronounced, and distressing, have longer duration, and
frequently occur without precipitants … Third, everyday worries are much less likely to be accompanied by
physical symptoms (e.g. restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge).
In addition to the emotional reaction to a generalized anxiety disorder are physical symptoms such as trembling,
twitching, feeling shaky, and muscle aches or soreness. There are usually somatic symptoms such as sweating,
nausea, diarrhea; and an exaggerated startle response. “Other conditions that may be associated with stress (e.g.
irritable bowel syndrome, headaches) frequently accompany generalized anxiety disorder” [see DSM-5 TR p.251].
The 12-month prevalence of the disorder in the U.S. is up to 2.9% in the general population and females are twice
as likely to have this disorder than men. The diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder peaks at middle age and
declines across the later years of life. The median age at onset is 30 and people who have this disorder usually
have felt anxious and nervous their entire lives. Rates of full remission are very low. The earlier in life the onset of
generalized anxiety disorder, the more impairment occurs later in life. Interestingly, one-third of the risk of
experiencing generalized anxiety disorder is genetic and overlap with risk of negativistic personality (neuroticism)
and major depressive disorder.
The DSM-5 TR discusses the functional effect of a generalized anxiety disorder in that excessive worrying impairs
the individual’s capacity to do things quickly and efficiently, whether at home or at work. The worrying takes time
and energy and the physiological effects (muscle tension, sleep disturbance, difficulty concentrating) contribute to
the impairment [see DSM-5 TR p. 253]:
Generalized anxiety disorder is associated with significant disability and distress that is independent of
comorbid disorders, and most non-institutionalized adults with the disorder are moderately to severely disabled.
Generalized anxiety disorder accounts for 110 million disability days per annum in the US population.
If an injured worker complains of symptoms related to having anxiety, the diagnostic criteria mentioned in this
section can serve as a template of questions to ask in a deposition concerning the background, history, and current
emotional and physical symptoms the person has and whether that person had been a “worrier” his or her entire
life.
The Substance/Medication-Induced Anxiety Disorder has the same diagnostic criteria as is set forth above in the
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder. The anxiety disorder develops during or soon after substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication, and the substance or medication is capable of causing
the symptoms of anxiety. The DSM-5 TR refers to the substances or medications that can cause an anxiety
disorder: alcohol, caffeine, cannabis, phencyclidine, other hallucinogen, inhalant, opioid, sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic, or cocaine. Again, this list is “included but not limited to” the listed examples [see DSM-5 TR p.256].
Page 256 of the DSM-5 TR also list medications that can cause an anxiety disorder from use of the medication to
include: anesthetics, analgesics, bronchodilators, anticholinergics, insulin, thyroid preparations, oral contraceptives,
antihistamines, corticosteroids, antihypertensive and cardiovascular medications, anticonvulsants, anti-psychotic
medications, and antidepressant medications. Also mentioned are exposures to gasoline and paint, carbon
monoxide, and carbon dioxide.
Page 3 of 3
§ 9.12 Anxiety Disorders
The DSM-5 TR also categorizes Anxiety Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition along the same diagnostic
criteria as a depressive disorder due to another medical condition. The diagnostic criteria for this condition is as
follows:
A. Panic attacks or anxiety is predominant in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is the
direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
There has to be panic attacks or anxiety as a predominant clinical emotional symptom and evidence that the
disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition. Some examples of medical
conditions that can cause this type of anxiety disorder include endocrine diseases (hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia),
cardiovascular disease (e.g., congestive heart failure, pulmonary embolism, arrhythmias like atrial fibrillation),
respiratory illnesses (COPD, asthma, pneumonia), metabolic disorders (such as vitamin B-12 deficiency) and
neurological illnesses (e.g., vestibular dysfunction, seizure disorders) [see DSM-5 TR pp. 258-259].
The DSM-5 TR also has “Other Specified Anxiety Disorder” and “Unspecified Anxiety Disorder” which cover
incomplete diagnoses where the patient does not meet full diagnostic criteria for an anxiety disorder or there is
insufficient evidence for a diagnosis.
In our workers’ compensation cases, we commonly encounter an injured worker who claims he or she has a “panic
disorder.” This diagnosis is one of the most frightening (no pun intended) psychiatric conditions a person can have,
other than a psychosis. While there are only four diagnostic criteria for a Panic Disorder, the diagnosis under the
DSM-5 TR is more strict than found in earlier editions of the DSM.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.13
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.13 Panic Disorder
For a legitimate diagnosis of a Panic Disorder, the DSM-5 TR requires [see DSM-5 TR pp. 235-249, which include
Panic Disorder, Panic Attack Specifier, and Agoraphobia]:
A. Recurrent unexpected panic attacks. A panic attack is an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort
that reaches a peak within minutes, and during which time 4 or more of the following symptoms occur:
Note: The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious state.
a. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate
b. Sweating
c. Trembling or shaking
d. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering
e. Feelings of choking
f. Chest pain or discomfort
g. Nausea or abdominal distress
h. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light headed, or faint
i. Chills or heat sensations
j. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations)
k. Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (feeling detached from one-self)
l. Fear of losing control or “going crazy”
m. Fear of dying
Note: Culture specific symptoms (tinnitus, neck soreness, headache, uncontrollable screaming or crying) may be
seen. Such symptoms should not count as one of the four required symptoms.
B. At least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 month or more of one or both of the following:
a. Persistent concern or worry about additional panic attacks or their consequences (such as losing control,
having a heart attack, going crazy)
b. A significant maladaptive change in behavior related to the attacks (e.g. avoidance of exercise or
unfamiliar situations)
C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism, cardiopulmonary disorders).
D. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., the panic attacks do not occur only
in response to feared social situations, as in social anxiety disorder, in response to circumscribed phobic
objects or situations, as in specific phobia; in response to obsessions, as in obsessive-compulsive
disorder; in response to reminders of traumatic events, as in post-traumatic stress disorder; or in response
to separation form attachment figures, as in separation anxiety disorder).
Page 2 of 3
§ 9.13 Panic Disorder
The term “recurrent” refers to the requirement that there be more than one unexpected panic attack. The term
“unexpected” refers to a panic attack for which there is no obvious cue or trigger at the time of occurrence—the
attack occurs from out of the blue such as while the individual is relaxing or emerging from sleep. Whether a panic
attack is expected or unexpected is left up to the evaluating physician to determine. The frequency and severity of
panic attacks vary widely from once a week for months at a time, or short bursts of daily attacks separated by
weeks or months, or with less frequent attacks (e.g., two per month) over a period of years. More than one full-
symptom panic attack (four or more items under Criteria A) is required for the diagnosis.
People with panic disorder often are intolerant of medication side-effects and there may be pervasive concerns
about abilities to complete daily tasks or withstand daily stressors, excessive use of drugs (like alcohol, prescribed
medications, or illicit drugs) to control panic attacks, or extreme behavior to control panic attacks (person is afraid of
taking medication that he or she thinks causes panic attacks). The median age for onset of symptoms in the U.S. is
20–24 years. Onset over 45 years is unusual but can occur. The disorder if untreated waxes and wanes. Only a
minority of patients have a full remission without subsequent relapse within a few years. There are usually other
medical and mental disorder diagnoses that accompany panic disorder [see DSM-5 TR pp. 236-239].
It is also believed that there is a strong genetic link to the development of a panic disorder: “Multiple genes confer
vulnerability to panic disorder. However, the exact genes, gene products, or functions related to the genetic regions
implicated remain unknown. There is an increased risk for panic disorder among offspring of parents with anxiety,
depressive, and bipolar disorders. Individuals with panic disorder display particularly enhanced sensitivity to
respiratory stimulation using CO2-enriched air. Respiratory disturbance, such as asthma, may be associated with
panic disorder, in terms of past history comorbidity, and family history. In addition, there are variations in symptom
presentation on a cultural basis” [see DSM-5 TR p.239].
The DSM-5 TR, pages 242-245, has a new section involving panic attacks called “Panic Attack Specifier,” stating in
a note:
Symptoms are presented for the purpose of identifying a panic attack; however, panic attack is not a mental
disorder and cannot be coded [under the ICD coding system]. Panic attacks can occur in the context of any
anxiety disorder as well as other mental disorders (e.g. depressive disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder,
substance use disorders, and some medical conditions (e.g. cardiac, respiratory, vestibular, gastro-intestinal).
When the presence of a panic attack is identified, it should be noted as a specifier (e.g. “posttraumatic stress
disorder with panic attacks”). For panic disorder, the presence of panic attack is contained within the criteria for
the disorder and panic attack is not used as a specifier.
An abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes, and during which
time four (or more) if the following symptoms occur:
Note: The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious state.
1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
2. Sweating.
3. Trembling or shaking.
4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering.
5. Feelings of choking.
6. Chest pain or discomfort.
7. Nausea or abdominal distress.
8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint.
9. Chills or heat sensations.
10. Paresthesias (numbness of tingling sensations).
Page 3 of 3
§ 9.13 Panic Disorder
11. Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from oneself).
12. Fear of losing control or “going crazy.”
13. Fear of dying.
This criteria is used for the purpose of when panic attacks are part of another mental or physical diagnosis. The
section earlier in this guidebook that discusses Panic Attack Disorder is a separate stand-alone mental disorder.
The panic attack specifier in this section above is attached to another mental disorder.
Patients who have panic disorders have high levels of social, occupational, and physical disabilities and the
disorder is associated with considerable economic costs with the highest number of emergency room and medical
office visits for all anxiety disorders. Individuals with panic disorders may be frequently absent from work for doctor
and emergency room visits and lose their jobs because of absenteeism [see DSM-5 TR p. 240]. In fact, people who
have a documented history of recurrent panic attacks more often than not qualify for Social Security Disability
benefits.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.14
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.14 Determination of WPI Ratings Using the GAF Score
The 2005 PDRS, pages 1-12 through 1-15, sets forth the methodology of determining the GAF for a patient. This is
performed as a part of the usual evaluation of a patient by a psychiatrist or psychologist. The medical determination
of the psychiatric condition in terms of symptom severity and effect on functioning of activities of daily living must be
based upon substantial medical evidence that includes a clinical evaluation, review of medical records, and the
patient’s history from reliable sources [see AMA Guides Chapter 14]. If you encounter a psychiatrist or psychologist
who has completely adopted use of the DSM-5 or DSM-5 TR and specifically rejects the use of the DSM-IV TR,
counsel should ask the doctor what an injured worker’s GAF score is at the time of MMI so that a strict WPI rating
can be determined.
Remember, Labor Code Section 3208,3(a) requires a DSM diagnosis as the first step in a psyche claim. Physicians
still use the DSM-IV TR since that edition has the GAF scoring system under the five Axis analysis. As stated in this
guidebook, the APA rejected the five Axis rubric in subsequent editions of the DSM. This author’s opinion is that the
current edition of the DSM, i.e., DSM-5 Text Revision, should be used to establish the most accurate DSM
diagnosis. This is because of the scientific research that has occurred since the DSM-IV TR and the DSM-5 were
published by the APA. In addition, Labor Code Section 3208.3 suggests that the most recent edition of the DSM be
used to determine a psychiatric diagnosis. That being said, there is no case law as of this publication date of this
guidebook that indicates physicians are required to use the most recent iteration of the DSM from the APA.
Steps 1 through 4 on page 1-13 of the 2005 PDRS are to be performed by the physician to determine which GAF
range a patient belongs and which specific GAF rating within a 10-point range applies based upon whether the
person is functioning at the higher or lower end of the 10-point range. The physician is required to consider
psychological, social, and occupational functioning on a hypothetical continuum of mental health-illness.
Instructions for Determining a GAF score:
• STEP 1: Starting at the top level of the GAF scale, evaluate each range by asking “is either the individual’s
symptom severity or level of functioning worse than what is indicated in the range description?”
• STEP 2: Keep moving down the scale until the range that best matches the individual’s symptom severity or
the level of functioning is reached, whichever is worse.
• STEP 3: Look at the next lower range as a double check against having stopped prematurely in Step 2. This
range should be too severe on both symptom severity and level of functioning. If it is, the appropriate range
has been reached (continue with Step 4). If not, go back to Step 2 and continue moving down the scale.
• STEP 4: To determine specific GAF rating within the selected 10-point range, consider whether the individual
is functioning at the higher or lower end of the 10-point range. For example, consider an individual who
hears voices that do not influence his or her behavior (e.g., someone with long standing Schizophrenia
who accepts his or her hallucinations as part of his or her illness). If the voices occur relatively infrequently
(once a week or less), a rating of 39 or 40 might be most appropriate. In contrast, if the individual hears
voices almost continuously, a rating of 31 or 32 would be more appropriate. See pages 1-14 and 1-15 of
the 2005 PDRS for the GAF ratings.
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.14 Determination of WPI Ratings Using the GAF Score
The GAF is then converted to whole person impairment (WPI) rating on the table found at page 1-16 of the 2005.
The eight work function impairment ratings are no longer used, unless a doctor has indicated the existence of
permanent psychiatric disability prior to the adoption of the 2005 PDRS [Lab. Code § 4660(d)].
The psychiatric protocols for rating permanent impairment are based upon nationally recognized standards. Unlike
the prior eight work function impairment ratings that were used under the 1997 Rating Schedule, psychiatrists and
psychologists throughout the nation are now able to rate permanent psychiatric impairments under the 2005 PDRS.
Once the physician determines the whole person impairment rating using the GAF scale, the WPI is converted to
permanent disability. The future earning capacity adjustment for a psychiatric impairment causes the WPI to be
increased by 40% based upon the FEC adjustment on page 2-3, and the chart on pages 2-6 and 2-7 of the 2005
PDRS. That rating is then adjusted for occupation and age using the same sections of the schedule as for physical
injuries. Use Section 5, pages 5-1 through 5-3 for adjustment of the rating for occupation, and Section 6, pages 6-1
through 6-5 for adjustment of the rating for the injured employee’s age on the date of injury. These instructions
above follow for dates of injury before January 1, 2013 and after January 1, 2004. For dates of injury on or after
January 1, 2013, the 8 DEF adjustment factors do not apply.  The rating for permanent disability for injuries on or
after January 1, 2013, adjusts by a 40% increase of the WPI rating from the PDRS regardless of the part of body
injured. So a WPI rating is first adjusted by the 1.4 multiplier adjustment factor—for example, a 10% WPI rating
becomes a 14% permanent disability rating before adjustment for occupation and age.
PRACTICE POINT:
When prosecuting or defending a psychiatric claim, the practitioner should always confirm the proper
sequential analysis of the GAF as described in the 2005 PDRS by the evaluating or treating physician. The
GAF scale can be very subjective, despite the requirement that it be based upon solid medical evidence
from the patient’s verifiable history, psychological testing, clinical examinations, and medical record review.
Counsel would not be out of line to challenge a psychiatrist or psychologist concerning their specific findings
of a GAF score and can be best accomplished via deposition of the doctor. ■
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.15
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.15 Apportionment of Psychiatric Injuries
Once the physician has determined the Global Assessment of Functioning and whole person impairment ratings,
the physician must indicate in a comprehensive medical-legal report whether there is any apportionment to
causation of the permanent psychiatric impairment from a prior award, prior or subsequent injuries, or non-industrial
factors [Lab. Code §§ 4663, 4664]. The physician must indicate what percentage of the employee’s permanent
psychiatric impairment is directly caused by the industrial injury and what percentage is caused by other factors
[Lab. Code §§ 4663, 4664; Escobedo v. Marshalls (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 604 (Appeals Board en banc
opinion), writ den. sub nom. Escobedo v. W.C.A.B. (2005) 70 Cal. Comp. Cases 1506 (writ denied)].
Customarily, apportionment is calculated after the total final permanent disability rating has been determined.
Counsel should note that permanent psychiatric impairments will be calculated separately from permanent physical
impairments and then combined with those physical injury ratings after apportionment to obtain an overall rating
after apportionment that represents the final ultimate permanent disability rating in a given case. See Sonoma State
University v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Hunton) [(2006) 142 Cal. App. 4th 500, 48 Cal. Rptr. 3d 330, 71 Cal.
Comp. Cases 1059], which discusses causation of a psychiatric injury versus causation of permanent disability. The
Court of Appeal indicates that the physician must first determine causation of the injury to meet the 51% threshold
for compensability under Labor Code § 3208.3 and then the physician can determine causation of permanent
disability based upon the totality of the GAF score. This leaves it to the parties, judges, and raters to determine the
calculation of permanent disability from the GAF score after apportionment.
A very interesting issue can arise between the medical and legal analysis of causation of a psychiatric injury,
requiring actual events of employment to be the predominant cause of a psychiatric injury or as a result of a violent
act or a catastrophic injury, as opposed to the causation of permanent psychiatric disability, which is a separate
medical and legal analysis. With the restrictions now mandated by Labor Code § 4660.1(c) for psychiatric injuries
that are the consequence of a physical injury, the issues of compensability and apportionment become more
complicated.
For example, a 55-year-old personal injury attorney has early onset heart disease that results in triple coronary by-
pass surgery at age 32. Meanwhile he suffers bouts of severe recurrent depression over the years, including two
long-term hospitalizations for depression and suicidal thoughts. One hospitalization for depression occurred after he
lost a personal injury jury trial.
The AME in internal medicine opined that part of the applicant’s heart disease is industrially related due to the
severe stress he has practicing law in a very large law practice as a solo practitioner. The AME in psychiatry opines
that part of the attorney’s psychiatric condition is caused by the heart condition, of which part is non-industrial, and
part is caused by the stress of his law practice. Under Labor Code § 4660.1(c), causation of the psychiatric injury is
probably caused by actual events of employment meeting the 51% causation of injury requirement of Labor Code
§ 3208.3.
But the portion of the applicant’s psychiatric permanent disability that is caused by the industrially caused heart
disease would have to be subtracted out of the total amount of industrially related psychiatric permanent disability
because the law now prohibits including impairment ratings for a psychiatric condition that is caused by a physical
injury. In this case, part of the psychiatric injury is caused by the physical heart condition that is in part industrially
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.15 Apportionment of Psychiatric Injuries
related and the other part of the psychiatric permanent disability is directly caused by the cumulative trauma
emotional stress of practicing law.
AMA Guides Chapters 14 (mental and behavioral disorders) and 18 (pain) do not have whole person impairment
rating measurements or scales. The 2005 PDRS solved the problem of the non-existence of a WPI rating scale for
psychiatric injuries under AMA Guides Chapter 14 by using the GAF score and conversion to WPI table [see 2005
PDRS, page 1-12].
AMA Guides Chapter 18 is to be used by medical doctors and interested parties in the manner also mandated by
the 2005 PDRS at page 1-12, which states: “A physician may perform a formal pain-related impairment assessment
if deemed necessary to justify the increase of an impairment rating based on the body or organ rating system. (See
Section 18.3f of the AMA Guides starting on page 575.) The maximum allowance for pain resulting from a single
injury is 3% WPI regardless of the number of impairments resulting from that injury.”
Remember, attorneys and judges should always be aware that the mandate of Labor Code §§ 4660 and 4660.1
adopt the entire AMA Guides, including AMA Guides Chapters 14 and 18. Knowledge of these two chapters is
essential to an understanding of the relationship and differences between an impairment that is caused by a
psychiatric condition and one that is caused by pain, and when impairments are caused by both. Use of AMA
Guides Chapter 18 alone could only result in an increase of WPI of up to 3%. Use of AMA Guides Chapter 14 and
the GAF method in the PDRS can increase impairment significantly.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.16
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.16 Rebutting a GAF Score
In the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR, the five Axes of diagnosis and GAF scoring from previous editions of the DSM have
been eliminated. Does this mean that we no longer use the GAF score to determine the WPI under the 2005
PDRS? Labor Code § 3208.3(a) mandates the use of the APA’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual:
(a) A psychiatric injury shall be compensable if it is a mental disorder which causes disability or need for
medical treatment, and it is diagnosed pursuant to procedures promulgated under paragraph (4) of subdivision
(j) of Section 139.2 or, until these procedures are promulgated, it is diagnosed using the terminology and
criteria of the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third
Edition-Revised, or the terminology and diagnostic criteria of other psychiatric diagnostic manuals generally
approved and accepted nationally by practitioners in the field of psychiatric medicine.
Labor Code § 139.2(j)(4) follows the same language as Labor Code § 3208.3(a) as to the requirement to use the
terminology and criteria of the APA’s “DSM-III Revised or the terminology and diagnostic criteria of other psychiatric
diagnostic manuals generally approved an accepted nationally by practitioners in the field of psychiatric medicine.”
As of May 10, 2013, the previous editions of the DSM have been specifically rejected by the APA and the DSM-5
has been adopted as of that date. As stated in this chapter, the APA has adopted the DSM-5 Text Revision in late
2022. Does this mean that the statute requires physicians to no longer use the DSM-IV Text Revised and the DSM-
5, in favor of the DSM-5 TR?
However, development of using the GAF score and tying it into WPI ratings are part of the 2005 PDRS—see pages
1-12 through 1-16. The 2005 PDRS is a result of a DWC Administrative Director regulation under Labor Code
§ 5307.3 and is not statutorily mandated for use to determine WPI ratings. The GAF-WPI rating method adopted by
the AD in the 2005 PDRS is not based on scientific study, nor is it based on research or on any discussions with
psychiatrists or psychologists during its development. The GAF-WPI rating methodology was developed by raters
from the Disability Evaluation Unit and its former manager who by training was a mathematician.
In short, the GAF-WPI rating method is the easiest WPI rating method from the 2005 PDRS to rebut, both medically
and legally. It must be emphasized that there is no scientific or medical basis to use a GAF score in order to obtain
a WPI rating for a psychiatric permanent disability. There is no correlation between a given GAF score and a WPI
rating other than what the DEU agreed to in closed door meetings and without the assistance of any psychiatrists or
psychologists. In order to rebut a strict WPI rating that is based on the GAF score at the time an injured worker is
MMI psychiatrically, it is necessary for counsel to obtain a medical opinion from the treating or evaluating physician
to determine a more accurate rating method, if one exists in a given case.
Now that the multi-axial system (Axes I through V) from the DSM IV has been eliminated from the DSM-5 and DSM-
5 TR, counsel has an even stronger argument in favor of rebutting a WPI rating that is based on a GAF score and
the 2005 PDRS. The argument has two arms—first, that the GAF score has been eliminated from the DSM-5 and
DSM-5 TR and, second, that there is no scientific basis to have a correlation between a given GAF score and a
WPI rating.
In every psychiatric claim, counsel should always consult with Ch. 3, §§ 3.13 and 3.14 of this guidebook to assist
you in determining the compensability and WPI rating methods for a psychiatric case that has an organically-based
disorder, e.g., as a result of a verified traumatic brain injury, or as a psychiatric disorder that is based solely on
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.16 Rebutting a GAF Score
subjective complaints of the injured worker but meet with DSM-5 TR diagnostic criteria for a neurocognitive
disorder. If there is an organic basis for the psychiatric diagnosis, then the treating or evaluating physician may
utilize many alternative rating methods to determine WPI ratings other than using the GAF-WPI scoring method that
is in the 2005 PDRS.
For example, Table 13-8 refers to Mental and Behavioral Impairments and a physician can evaluate work function
impairments using the criteria on page 365 of the AMA Guides and Table 1-2 for ADL functional deficits and then
apply the analysis of those criteria to Table 13-8 to arrive at a WPI rating that is probably more accurate than using
the non-scientifically based GAF conversion to WPI method in the 2005 PDRS. This would be an example of
rebutting a “scheduled” rating under Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Board (Guzman)
[(2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837 (“Guzman III”)].
Another method in an organically-based psychiatric case would be for the physician to utilize Tables 13-5 and 13-6
of the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CDR), and this method could also be used in conjunction with Table 13-8.
A third alternative method of determining permanent psychiatric impairment would be to use the WHODAS disability
scale that is discussed above under the descriptions and diagnostic criteria of the DSM-5 TR [see § 9.06].
Can these alternative methods of rating WPI in psychiatric cases be used in non-organic psychiatric cases, such as
in a chronic pain syndrome case? Disregarding whether such a case is or is not a “catastrophic injury” as defined in
Labor Code § 4060.1(c), counsel should use caution in trying to bolster a case based on subjective complaints as
opposed to providing accurate ratings of impairment caused by an industrial injury. However, in many cases with
non-organic psychiatric sequelae, the psychiatric diagnostic criteria are met and the symptoms the injured worker
experiences are just as real as those caused by a direct head trauma.
The reason the subject of “organic” or “non-organic” basis of a psychiatric disorder is brought up here is because of
the prevalent debate in the medical community over whether there is a difference between the two in the first place.
Many physicians believe in the biological basis of the existence of a mental disorder with little or no environmental
factors playing a role. Other physicians believe that environmental factors play as important a role in the
development and course of a mental disorder as biological factors such as genetics and neurotransmitter levels and
receptors. In the course of deposing physicians, you will have to know where physicians are coming from on these
issues. Some physicians believe that all mental disorders are biologically based (e.g., genetically predisposed to
depression, a person born with low levels of dopamine or dopamine receptors) while others will contend that the
environment causes mental disorders (e.g., a job injury, divorce, etc.). Despite this on-going debate in medicine,
remember that causation of injury is separate from causation of impairment as discussed earlier in this guidebook,
and a work injury or the consequences of a work injury can be a contributing cause of a mental disorder as long as
the diagnostic criteria of that disorder is met and the limitations of Labor Code § 3208.3 are met.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.17
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.17 How to Rate Chronic Pain Syndromes
One of the most vexing issues that we see in our cases is whether chronic pain conditions can be rated under the
AMA Guides when an injured worker becomes MMI or permanent and stationary. “Impairment due primarily to
intractable pain may greatly influence an individual’s ability to function” [AMA Guides 5th Edition, Section 13.8, page
343]. To some medical practitioners, pain is the “fifth vital sign” and besides checking blood pressure, heart rate,
respiration, and temperature of a patient, it is becoming common practice for physicians to also ask patients to rate
themselves on a visual analog scale (VAS) for pain.
The International Association of the Study of Pain has defined pain as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional
experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage.” Pain is a
subjective symptom with both psychological and sensory components—there does not have to be tissue damage
for pain to occur [see IASP2023, www.iasp-pain.org and go to the IASP Taxonomy section on the home page].
The first issue is to determine whether a person has a chronic pain condition and if so which kind. Then a
determination has to be made as to whether the injured worker has received all reasonable medical treatment to
address the chronic pain condition so that it reasonably can be considered to be stabilized and ready for WPI
ratings. If the treating or evaluating physician is convinced that the chronic pain condition is stabilized with
treatment, then and only then can the injured worker be declared MMI/permanent and stationary and WPI ratings
can be assigned. But how are physicians to utilize the AMA Guides to rate chronic pain syndromes?
An ancillary issue is, can a physician rate drug addiction or dependency that is caused by an industrial injury? We
see significant cases in which an injured worker is placed on opioids, benzodiazepines, and hypnotics (sleep
medications) and becomes dependent on them on a long term, if not permanent, basis. See the discussion of
medication side effects in Ch. 5, § 5.12. Remember, drug addiction or dependency is a separate and distinct issue
from any impairment associated with the side effects of medication in general. In fact, case law has supported the
fact that an injured worker’s drug dependency along with his or her physical limitations rendered the injured worker
presumptively permanently and totally disabled based on the fact pursuant to Labor Code § 4662. See the
discussion of the Boatright noteworthy panel decision in Ch. 5, § 5.28[4].
There are different types of chronic pain conditions that once diagnosed and stabilized can form the basis for WPI
ratings using the AMA Guides. There are basically two types of chronic pain cases—ones that have a physiologic
explanation and those that do not.
Physiologic chronic pain cases have two different types within that category—nociceptive and neuropathic pain.
Nociceptive pain involves actual tissue damage that causes pain receptors (nociceptor nerves) to fire along neural
pathways. The nociceptors cells do not stop firing, and the bio-chemical result is that the local region tells the dorsal
spine that the local area is in pain and the spine then tells the pain receptors in the brain and the injured worker
feels sharp, aching or throbbing pain in the local area of tissue damage. Nociceptive pain can be caused by an
otherwise benign pathology. Neuropathic pain on the other hand is caused by actual nerve damage, and injured
workers describe pain along a nerve distribution as burning, a “heavy sensation,” or numbness along the nerve
pathway. Many injured workers also complain of weakness of an involved extremity. Neuropathic pain can be
caused by direct trauma to a nerve (a “pinched” nerve), malnutrition, alcoholism, diabetic polyneuropathy,
inflammation, or an infection.
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.17 How to Rate Chronic Pain Syndromes
The physiologic chronic pain cases involve such conditions as failed lumbar syndrome that can be caused by many
factors, including scar tissue formation around nerve roots, multi-level spinal pathology, arachnoiditis, and spinal
instability. Other physiologically based chronic pain conditions include complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS)
either in the form of Type I RSD or Type II Causalgia. This condition can occur in an upper extremity, lower
extremity, or combination of them. See Ch. 5, § 5.16, for a discussion of the diagnosis of CRPS.
On the other hand, there is non-physiologically based chronic pain, which is essentially referred to as “somatic
related disorders” that involve pain as the primary symptom but where there is no known bio-physiological
explanation of the source of the pain. Somatic pain related disorders can be as debilitating as physiologically based
pain, but the frustration of physicians, attorneys, claims examiners, and in most cases, the injured worker himself or
herself is that there is no medical explanation for the existence of the pain. There is no longer any tissue or nerve
damage, or there was not any to begin with at the time of injury, but there is a perception of severe debilitating pain
where the injured worker lives his or her life around the pain as the center of his or her universe. The important
reminder here is for these injured workers, any underlying physical injury has long ago healed by objective medical
standards and there is no longer a physical explanation for these injured workers’ complaints of intractable pain. But
the pain they experience is real and can be debilitating.
The DMS-IV TR included Pain Disorder as a diagnosis for these patients. The DSM-5, adopted by the APA in May
2013 and DSM-5 TR adopted in 2022 eliminated Pain Disorder as a diagnosis and instead subsumed it into a new
section called Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders [see DSM-5 TR p. 349]. The now obsolete DSM-IV TR
Pain Disorder required as part of the diagnostic criteria that there be no underlying medical explanation for the
painful condition. Under the DSM-5 TR, the APA has eliminated that as a required part of the diagnostic criteria.
The authors of the DSM-5 recognize that [see DSM-5 TR pp. 349-350]:
[S]omatic symptom disorders can also accompany diagnosed medical disorders. The reliability of determining
that a somatic symptom is medically unexplained is limited, and grounding a diagnosis on the absence of an
explanation is problematic and reinforces mind-body dualism. It is not appropriate to give an individual a mental
disorder diagnosis solely because a medical cause cannot be demonstrated. Furthermore, the presence of a
medical diagnosis does not exclude the possibility of a co-morbid medical disorder, including a somatic
symptom and related disorder. Perhaps because of the predominant focus on lack of medical explanation,
individuals regard these diagnoses as pejorative and demeaning, implying that their physical symptoms were
not “real.” The new classification defines the major diagnosis, somatic symptom disorder, on the basis of
positive symptoms (distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in response
to these symptoms).
In the DSM-5 TR, diagnoses in the DSM-IV of somatization disorder, hypochondriasis, pain disorder, and
undifferentiated somatoform disorder (used by some physicians to rate fibromyalgia in the past) have been
removed and substituted with the new category of Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders [see DSM-5 TR pp.
349-350].
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.18
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.18 Rating Chronic Pain When There Is Objective Medical Evidence
The first step to rate WPI for chronic pain syndromes is to identify any permanent objective medical findings.
The difficulty in all of these types of chronic pain cases is how to rate them accurately in accordance with current
case law. The first rule is to recognize the diagnosis and whether there are permanent objective medical findings.
The second step is to identify the primary parts of body injured and to rate them in accordance with the strict
application of the AMA Guides.
The Court of Appeal in Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (Guzman) “Guzman III”
[(2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th 808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837] mandates that in establishing the
most accurate rating is to utilize the applicable chapter, tables, and methods in the Guides and determine the strict
WPI ratings for each part of body injured. See Chapters 4 through 7 of this guidebook for a discussion of the
Guzman III case. So if you have a lumbar, cervical, or thoracic spine case, you utilize Chapter 15 of the AMA
Guides; if you have a shoulder, hand, elbow, or wrist case you utilize Chapter 16 of the AMA Guide; if you have a
knee, ankle, hip, or leg case, you utilize Chapter 17; if you have a heart or hypertension case, you utilize Chapters 3
and 4, and so on.
The third step is to determine whether the strict WPI ratings are the most accurate ratings in a given case and, if
not, what alternative rating method produces the most accurate ratings.
If a case evolves into a chronic pain case, the treating and evaluating physician and common sense will indicate
that the injured worker has not recovered from an industrial injury. In so many of our cases, secondary gain is not a
primary motivating factor—most injured workers are motivated to become better and return to work. Regardless of
how cynical you may be, the epidemiology of work injuries indicate the vast majority of injured workers nationwide
want to become better and return to work and return to productive lives, and most people do. It is easy for claims
administrators, employers, and defense counsel to become cynical when we see so many failures. As a matter of
fact, very few cases of malingering actually occur. See the discussion on malingering in the text below.
Attorneys who practice Social Security Disability law see the same phenomenon in their clients, regardless of
whether an illness or injury is work related—most people who become sick or injured are motivated to become
better and return to productivity in their lives.
That being said, the AMA Guides provides a framework for evaluating WPI ratings in cases that evolve into chronic
pain syndromes. Much of the discussion of these conditions are scattered throughout the Guides, but there are
many different ways to rate chronic pain cases. As stated above, it starts with a diagnosis with permanent objective
medical findings.
If there is a chronic pain syndrome, the fourth step is to identify how the strict or alternative WPI ratings can be
adjusted to account for the chronic pain syndrome as opposed to a 3% WPI add-on for pain related impairment
pursuant to Page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS.
The key to this is to differentiate between a 3% pain add-on to a strict WPI rating and evaluating a chronic pain
syndrome separately as its own ratable entity. The difference between the two is that a chronic pain syndrome
usually arises out of a separate diagnosis such as complex regional pain syndrome (RSD or causalgia), post-
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.18 Rating Chronic Pain When There Is Objective Medical Evidence
traumatic neuralgia, thoracic outlet syndrome, fibromyalgia, or what used to be called a psychiatric “pain disorder,”
which is now more accurately called a somatic symptom disorder. For a detailed discussion about fibromyalgia and
how to rate it, see Ch. 5, § 5.24, and for a discussion of the 3% WPI pain related add-on, see Ch. 5, § 5.25, below.
In certain cases, we see applicants who have a fairly routine injury, such as the development of carpal tunnel
syndrome or a herniated lumbar disc, surgery is performed, and then all heck breaks loose and the applicant
becomes severely disabled. These cases, fortunately, are rare in clinical medical practices. See, for example, the
Hikida case [Hikida v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (2017) 12 Cal. App. 5th 1249, 82 Cal. Comp. Cases 679]
discussed in this guidebook, where the injured worker had carpal tunnel surgery that turned in to a confirmed
severe case of complex regional pain syndrome, resulting in a 100% permanent total disability rating. The diagnosis
and treatment of chronic pain syndromes have developed into a medical specialty in its own right and some
discussion is in order here.
In clinical medical practice, it is not so much what the chronic pain syndrome is called; rather, it is more relevant as
to what the presenting symptoms are and the best ways to treat a given patient. The AMA Guides refer only once to
independently ratable chronic pain syndromes in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, Section
13.8, page 343.
Do not confuse a diagnosis of a chronic pain syndrome that is discussed as a ratable permanent impairment in
Section 13.8 of the AMA Guides and then up to 3% WPI add-on for pain that has a greater than expected effect on
a person’s ADL functioning as indicated in AMA Guides, Chapter 18, and page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS. In order to
have a ratable permanent WPI impairment for a stand-alone diagnosis of a chronic pain syndrome, there must be
one of the three diagnoses mentioned in Section 13.8: CRPS-RSD; CRPS Causalgia; or “posttraumatic neuralgia.”
The instructions in AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Section 13.8, page 343, state:
To rate an impairment for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and RSD in an upper extremity, see Table 13-22.
If a lower extremity needs to be rated for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, or RSD, use the station and gait
impairment criteria in Table 13-15.
“Posttraumatic neuralgia” is not defined in the AMA Guides, so counsel needs to rely on the clinical expertise of the
diagnosing physician to determine if this criteria can be used to rate a condition as a “chronic pain syndrome.” Bear
in mind, “neuralgia” is defined as severe, stabbing, throbbing, or burning pain along a nerve distribution. So there
has to be neuropathic or nociceptor pain for a chronic pain syndrome to be ratable as a stand-alone impairment.
Counsel must develop the record to determine the nature of the chronic pain syndrome and its origin.
An interesting anomaly in the AMA Guides is that a neuropathic chronic pain syndrome affecting a lower extremity
can rate up to a 60% WPI under AMA Guides, Chapter 13, Table 13-15, at page 336, but an amputated leg rates a
40% WPI under AMA Guides, Chapter 17. The only explanation of this disparity is that a neuropathic chronic pain
syndrome affects more than just the injured lower extremity.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.19
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.19 Rating Chronic Pain in the Absence of Objective Medical Evidence
Can a chronic pain syndrome case be rated under the AMA Guides despite the absence of permanent objective
medical evidence for the pain? The answer depends upon the physician’s diagnosis and the legal restrictions under
Labor Code § 4660.1 that prohibits a psychiatric impairment rating for a psychiatric diagnosis that is caused by a
physical injury in the absence of a violent act or catastrophic injury. See Chapter 5 of this guidebook for a
discussion of SB 863 and how permanent disability is now established for injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013.
In some cases, the only explanation for an injured worker’s chronic pain syndrome is that of a psychiatric origin. If
that is the case, then the restrictions of Labor Code § 3208.3 apply and the analysis of WPI shifts to the GAF score
and associated WPI rating that is mandated by the 2005 PDRS. The fact that the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR eliminate
the GAF score along with Axes I through Axis V (the GAF score was Axis V) may not affect our rating these cases.
This is because the use of the GAF score is mandated by regulation. Remember, the 2005 PDRS itself is a
regulation adopted by the DWC Administrative Director and no changes to the 2005 PDRS on rating psychiatric
impairment are on the horizon.
This raises an interesting question. Since the GAF score has been eliminated from the DSM-5 and DSM-5 TR, can
counsel make the case that alternative and more accurate ratings for psychiatric injuries, including chronic pain, in
the absence of any remaining physical objective medical findings can be accomplished within the AMA Guides to
rebut a WPI rating based on a GAF score? So far, there is no published DCA case that supports using the AMA
Guides to rebut a GAF-based WPI rating. However, there are WCAB noteworthy panel decisions that do. The
purpose of this discussion is to raise the issue here since the DSM-5 TR has been adopted by the APA and no one
currently knows what psychiatrists and psychologists will do with the application of prior editions of the DSM to
determine WPI ratings. Labor Code § 3208.3 is vaguely written, and an argument can be made that prior editions of
the DSM no longer apply and since there is no longer a GAF score, the 2005 PDRS ratings for psychiatric
impairment are obsolete. We will see how psychiatrists, psychologists, and the WCAB react to this.
However, in the context of chronic pain in the absence of a physical diagnosis, the AMA Guides may provide an
alternative framework for physicians to evaluate these cases and apply WPI ratings within the four corners of the
Guides. This rubric might apply in any psychiatric claim and not just chronic pain cases.
An alternative rating method for chronic pain cases that do not have an underlying physical explanation may be
analyzed as follows:
• What is the cause of the chronic pain syndrome?
• Rate ADL functioning using Table 1-2 on page 4 utilizing the severity classes set forth in Table 14-1 on page
366(?)
• Rate workplace function using the four categories listed on page 365 of the AMA Guides and also evaluate
them in the context of severity classes set forth in Table 14-1 on page 366
○ Understanding and memory, such as following instructions and carrying out procedures
○ Sustained concentration, productivity, and persistence to task completion
○ Social interaction with the public, co-workers, and management
○ Adaptation to changes in work place duties and responsibilities
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.19 Rating Chronic Pain in the Absence of Objective Medical Evidence
• Utilize Table 13-8 on page 325 for Class 1 through Class 4 for Rating Impairment Due To Emotional or
Behavioral Disorders
• Explain how and why an injured worker falls within a class and how a specific WPI rating is established within
a class
• Establish how and why the overall impairment is permanent
What is elegant about this method is that all of the criteria are within the four corners of the Guides. There seems to
be a much more logical correlation between using ADL and work function impairment assessments that are clearly
delineated in the Guides with an impairment rating schedule that is also within the Guides. The GAF scores
associated with WPI ratings in the 2005 PDRS are not based on any kind of scientific research or consensus of
psychiatrists or psychologists. It is based on a consensus of DEU raters and the former manager of the DEU who in
2005 developed this rubric.
The severity index in Table 14-1, while not providing any direct WPI ratings, does provide a psychiatrist or
psychologist with a way of assessing severity of impairment with a list of functions, both ADL and work, that he or
she can assess and then apply logically to the classes of emotional and behavioral WPI ratings listed in Table 13-8.
The conclusions of the evaluating or treating physician must constitute substantial evidence so that there has to be
strong evidence of the level of severity of impairment of function with ADLs, work functions, or both, along with a
proper DSM diagnosis of a mental disorder that is causing the impairment of function that is permanent.
This method of evaluating and rating WPI for mental and behavioral impairment for a chronic pain case is elegant
because it follows the law. In Guzman III, the Court of Appeal upheld the WCAB decision that strict WPI ratings can
be rebutted if a physician states why a strict rating is inaccurate and why an alternative WPI rating is more accurate
than the strict one. This concept applies to any WPI rating including a psychiatric WPI rating derived from a GAF
score [see Milpitas Unified School District v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Board (Guzman) (2010) 187 Cal. App. 4th
808, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 112, 75 Cal. Comp. Cases 837].
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.20
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.20 Rating Narcotic Addiction and Dependency
One of the saddest facts of life is that many injured workers fall from being productive members of society to
becoming fully dependent on narcotic medication, losing a quality of life that we all expect and hope for. Substance
abuse is a national problem and not just among injured workers. Even the AMA Guides speak about these people
in Chapter 14, section 14.4e on page 365:
Chronic substance abuse and personality disorders can coincide. The effects of chronic substance abuse
include impairments in concentration, attention, impulse control, judgment, etc., which often last for the duration
of the dependency. These behaviors can also occur with personality disorders. To evaluate the severity of the
impairment, the examiner needs to assess whether there are (1) restrictions in activities of daily living; (2)
difficulties in maintaining social functioning; (3) difficulties in completing tasks in a timely manner because of
deficiencies in concentration, persistence and pace; and (4) repeated episodes of decompensation and loss of
adaptive functioning, averaging three times per year, with each episode lasting 2 or more weeks.
The typical case starts with an industrial injury and evolves into an injured worker’s dependency on opioids,
benzodiazepines, and hypnotics. The opioids are the narcotic pain relievers, the benzodiazepines are the anti-
anxiety medications, and the hypnotics are the sleep medications. Dependency can occur for any one of these
medications or a combination thereof. You do not need to go too far beyond the FDA mandated warnings about
side effects of these drugs that accompany each prescription in order to establish how they can affect a person’s
ADL and work functioning. See Ch. 8, §§ 8.06[26] and 8.07 of this guidebook for a detailed description of these
medications.
If an injured worker with chronic pain syndrome becomes drug dependent, can the drug dependency be rated by
itself? In some cases, yes, if within reasonable medical probability the drug dependency is permanent at the time of
MMI. There are probably four ways such a case can be rated:
• Using the 2005 PDRS for GAF and WPI due to substance use disorder that is within all versions of the DSM.
• Using the alternative rating method under Table 13-8 described above as an alternative psychiatric rating
method that uses the AMA Guides to rebut a GAF-WPI rating method.
• Using Table 13-5 (Clinical Dementia Scale), Table 13-6 (Rating impairment based on mental status), and
Table 13-4 for sleep and arousal disorders.
• Using the WHODAS disability rating schedule from the DSM-5 TR.
There is a detailed description of how to use Tables 13-5 and 13-6 in the context of a stroke case in Ch. 3, § 3.13 of
this guidebook.
The rationale for rating drug dependency is based on the notion that the cause of the dependency is iatrogenic—
caused by the treating physician, who in recent times, is supposed to be an employer’s physician under a
sanctioned MPN. The problem, for example, is how inexpensive it is for a person to become addicted to a Schedule
II narcotic. A 90-day supply of hydrocodone 750 ES (an opioid with acetaminophen, brand name Vicodin) costs
about $68.00. An office visit to a physician to obtain the prescription for it costs about $98.32. So the injured worker
is happy because the pain goes away if he takes the drug as prescribed, which is up to 4 tablets a day. The claims
administrator is happy because it only costs them under $200.00 every 45 days for medical treatment, and the
Page 2 of 2
§ 9.20 Rating Narcotic Addiction and Dependency
doctor is happy because the patient stops whining about being in pain all the time. On a national scale, this is a
recipe for substance abuse and narcotic dependency. It is true now as it was 50 years ago when doctors prescribed
a lot of Valium to nervous patients. It is an epidemic in the United States, and the FDA is taking steps to reduce the
public’s dependency on these drugs.
However, we are faced with the requirement that all industrially caused permanent impairment result in accurate
WPI ratings. Drug dependent injured workers should be entitled to benefits based on this problem if drug
dependency is permanent, attempts at detoxification do not work, detoxification is not offered by the claims
administrator, or the services are refused by the injured worker due to the underlying dependency.
Tables 13-5 and 13-6 must be utilized together. The evaluating physician scores each impairment under the Clinical
Dementia Scale for memory, orientation, judgment and problem solving, community affairs (including work—
“independent function at usual level in job, …”), home and hobbies, and personal care. The scoring system applies,
and then the WPI is determined by the physician’s use of Table 13-6. Table 13-4, commonly used to this point in
time for sleep disorders, also can be used to determine impairment due to being under the influence of these
medications, which all can cause drowsiness if taken during the day time.
Some attorneys are advocating use of Tables 13-5 and 13-6 in regular psychiatric cases instead of the GAF-WPI
method mandated in the 2005 PDRS or the alternative method using Tables 14-1, ADLs and work function analysis
and Table 13-8 described above. Case law will have to be developed to see whether the WCAB accepts these
methods as either rebuttal to a strict GAF-WPI rating or as a stand-alone rating for drug dependency due to an
industrial injury.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.21
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.21 Sleep Disorders
[1] Introduction and Background
There is significant disagreement within the workers’ compensation community about the role that sleep
disorders have on rating permanent disability in cases in which the AMA Guides apply. Hopefully, this section
will clear up any misunderstandings about how and when sleep disorders can be ratable and when they cannot.
The California legislature answered part of the question by enacting Labor Code § 4660.1 for injuries occurring
on or after 1/1/2013. Section 4660.1(c) prohibits adding impairment ratings for sleep disorders and sexual
dysfunction that are caused by a physical injury.
First of all, sleep that is nocturnal and restful is an ADL pursuant to AMA Guides Chapter 1, Table 1-2, page 4.
Common sense tells us that if a person is suffering from a sleep disorder caused by pain from an industrial
injury and because sleep is an ADL affected by the injury, then up to 3% WPI can be added to the underlying
impairment rating that is causing the pain. However, Labor Code § 4660.1(c) calls this into question for injuries
occurring on or after 1/1/2013 since that section prohibits adding impairments for sleep disorders and sexual
dysfunction that are caused by a physical injury. This probably applies across the board, whether the sleep
disorder or sexual dysfunction is an up to 3% WPI pain related impairment affecting ADLs or as a stand-alone
WPI rating. Case law will have to develop to determine whether up to 3% WPI pain related impairment can
include consideration of sleep disorder or sexual dysfunction as part of the ADL listing analysis pursuant to
Table 1-2 on page 4 in the AMA Guides.
In fact, conservative physicians will indicate in their reports that sleep disturbance is already included within the
impairment rating given for the underlying medical condition. Liberal physicians will want to add up to 3%,
arguing that the sleep disturbance is not already included in the underlying rating and that since sleep is an
ADL listed in the AMA Guides, then up to 3% WPI can be added. Alternatively, liberal physicians will want to
rate any sleep disorder that is related to an industrial injury, regardless of its cause, including pain.
[2] Ratability of Sleep Disorder
Can a sleep disturbance or disorder be ratable in its own right? The answer is “yes” as long as the cause of the
sleep disorder is not pain from an underlying injury. There has to be a direct cause or a link between the
industrial injury and the sleep disorder other than pain. But how is a sleep disorder diagnosed?
If you do some medical research on the subject of sleep disorders, you will discover that there is an entire
chapter of the DSM-5 TR devoted to sleep disorders—how to diagnose, evaluate and categorize them. On
page 407 of the DSM-5 TR, the authors describe the 10 types of sleep disorders under the chapter heading,
“Sleep-Wake Disorders.” In the introduction to sleep disorders on page 407, the authors of the DSM-5 TR state
unequivocally that in order to diagnose a sleep disorder, there must be polysomnography performed in a sleep
laboratory. The DSM-5 TR categorizes sleep disorders into different types that include forms of insomnia (not
enough sleep), hypersomnia (too much sleep) and such disorders as narcolepsy, sleep disorders associated
with a psychiatric condition (e.g., clinical depression), sleep disorders associated with a medical condition (e.g.,
head injury), and substance induced sleep disorders (associated with use of a substance including
medications).
The other problem with sleep disorders is that it is very difficult to predict whether a sleep disorder is
permanent. We know that long term use of sleep medication is contraindicated; in fact, long term use of sleep
medication can cause a substance induced sleep disorder. The argument is that if a patient needs sleep
Page 2 of 5
§ 9.21 Sleep Disorders
medication, then there is a sleep disorder that needs to be evaluated without use of medication, much like a
hearing loss is evaluated without hearing aids.
But once you have a diagnosis of a sleep disorder under the DSM-5 TR, does the applicant have to be
evaluated using the 2005 PDRS for psychiatric conditions, with the limitations of Labor Code § 3208.3, a final
GAF score, and a 40% increase for the DFEC adjustment? Remember, Labor Code § 4660(b)(1) mandates that
we use the descriptions and measurements of the AMA Guides to determine permanent disability [see [3],
below].
For now, we are taking a strict approach to the issue of when a sleep disorder can be rated in a workers’
compensation case. Case law may clarify some of the controversies that arise in cases that involve an
allegation of a sleep disorder.
For injuries occurring prior to 1/1/2013, there are three choices of how a sleep disorder may apply in a given
case:
1. A sleep disorder is already included in the underlying impairment’s WPI rating.
2. A sleep disorder can have up to 3% WPI added as part of page 1-12 of the 2005 PDRS that relates to
pain related impairment add-ons.
3. Sleep disorder is a stand-alone WPI rating using Table 13-4.
Medical evidence has to support one of the three choices in any given case. But remember the limitation of the
application of this to injuries occurring on or after 1/1/2013, which prohibits adding WPI ratings for sleep
disorders and sexual dysfunction as a result of a physical injury. The question will exist until case law
establishes any exceptions to this in cases such as a serious head injury that includes a sleep disorder, sexual
dysfunction, or both, where the date of injury is on or after 1/1/2013.
[3] AMA Guides Discussion of Sleep Disorders
Since sleep is a function of the brain and central nervous system, we need to look at AMA Guides Chapter 13,
The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, Section 13.3c, Arousal and Sleep Disorders, page 317, Table 13-
4, which is operative in our cases. The instructions on page 317 are controlling:
It is expected that the diagnosis of excessive daytime sleepiness has been supported by formal studies in
a sleep laboratory The clinician can evaluate sleepiness with the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, which
assesses the likelihood of dozing … in different situations … [footnote omitted]
This type of emphatic language in the AMA Guides is precisely the tone used in academic medicine to stress a
point. If you ask most clinical practitioners, they will almost uniformly agree that you do not need a
polysomnogram in every case in order to diagnose a sleep disorder. In a clinical medical practice, if a patient
presents to a psychiatrist or psychologist with objective evidence of depression and an anxious state, with a
haggard countenance, it is probable that the patient has a ratable sleep disorder.
However, the AMA Guides do not have any qualifying language to the contrary, and together with the
instructions in the DSM-5 TR, if you have a case in which a sleep disorder is suspected or claimed, then a
polysomnogram is required. In addition, a Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT) is also recommended to
determine how a person’s sleep latency (how long it takes to fall asleep) affects ADL functioning. These studies
generally take 21 consecutive hours in a sleep laboratory and can cost up to $3,600 under the current fee
schedule. The DSM-5 TR on page 411 suggests the importance of polysomnogram testing (discussed
specifically on pages 408-409) along with a Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT) study.
There is an argument being made by some physicians that for a Class I or Class II sleep disorder rating under
Table 13-4, only an Epworth Sleepiness Scale is needed. But if you read the actual instructions in the AMA
Guides page 317, there is no qualifying language when the authors state “it is expected” that sleep studies be
conducted in a laboratory. All an Epworth Sleepiness Scale consists of is a self-report visual analog scale of
eight questions, worth up to 3 points each. If a patient scores 10 points, he or she has a Class II sleep disorder
impairment rating under Table 13-4, which is a 10%–29% WPI stand-alone impairment rating.
A Class II sleep disorder rating of 10% WPI to 29% WPI involves “Reduced daytime alertness, interferes with
ability to perform some ADLs.” This covers just about everyone during our MCLE seminars! Realistically, a
Page 3 of 5
§ 9.21 Sleep Disorders
person who has a sleep disorder has very serious problems—personally, socially and occupationally—and this
diagnosis should never be taken lightly. For example, a patient who wakes up once an hour is not getting
adequate sleep and usually is visible in that person’s countenance. A sleep study in a sleep laboratory will
show restorative sleep with deep delta waves and adequate rapid eye movement time (i.e., at least 90 minutes
of REM a night). So again, development of the record is essential if an applicant is claiming a sleep disorder.
PRACTICE POINT:
Defense counsel is urged to take the deposition of the applicant if a sleep disorder is alleged in order to
determine whether the condition is caused by pain from an injury. In addition, other causative factors
can be discovered, such as allergies to a pillow, an animal that sleeps in the same room, or a spouse
or significant other who snores and disrupts the applicant’s sleep patterns. Remember, 25% of the
adult population suffers from a diagnosable sleep disorder. People who live in cities have a greater
incidence of sleep disorders than the population who lives in rural areas. So the cause of sleep
disorders can be multifactoral. A good benchmark to determine, subjectively, if someone has a sleep
disorder is if he or she wakes up once an hour or is one who regularly sleeps less than 6.5 hours per
night. ■
PRACTICE POINT:
Attorneys who represent applicants have to be circumspect before you allege a sleep disorder since, in
many cases, if a person has diminished day time alertness, his or her driver’s license may be in
jeopardy, and physicians have a statutory duty to report anyone who has a neurological condition that
may affect his or her ability to safely operate a motor vehicle. ■
The instructions on page 317 of the AMA Guides list some examples of medical conditions that can result in a
sleep disorder that are ratable under Table 13-4, such as traumatic brain injury, stroke, Alzheimer’s Disease,
depression and other diseases and disorders. The language on page 317 indicates that sleep disorders can be
caused by or linked to other conditions not listed as examples on page 317—i.e., the list on that page is not
exclusive.
Notice also that depression is listed on page 317 and sleep disorders can arise from depression. This
correlates with the DSM-5 TR diagnosis of a sleep disorder associated with a psychiatric condition. The
question is how much of a person’s impairment and effects on ADL functioning is caused by the depression and
how much is caused by the sleep disorder? The treating or evaluating physician would have to either give an
overall DSM-5 TR differential diagnosis with the GAF score for both the sleep disorder under the 2005 PDRS
reference to the DSM IV TR and the depression together as one rating or a GAF score only for the depression
and a separate rating under Table 13-4 for the sleep disorder under the AMA Guides.
A 2023 Appeals Board panel decision brings current interpretation of the law behind allowing permanent
impairment for a sleep disorder that is due to severe pain from spinal surgeries and other components of an
injury. In Miller v. State of CA Ventura Youth Correctional Facility [2023 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 73
(Appeals Board noteworthy panel decision)], the applicant, a substitute teacher, sustained injuries AOE/COE to
multiple parts of body, including cervical and lumbar spine, shoulders and other conditions (gastrointestinal and
headaches) in a specific injury occurring on January 6, 2012, and by way of cumulative trauma for the period
June 10, 2010 through January 6, 2012.
An AME in internal medicine opined that the applicant sustained a ratable sleep disorder as a result of her
orthopedic injuries. At trial, the parties stipulated to the permanent disability ratings for the orthopedic conditions
but disputed whether the sleep disorder was ratable and further disputed whether the ratings should be added
or combined using the Combined Values Chart. The differences in ratings would result in either a 67%
permanent disability or a 70% permanent disability, depending on whether the judge concluded the ROM
method applied and not the DRE method for the spinal conditions, and whether the sleep disorder was ratable.
Page 4 of 5
§ 9.21 Sleep Disorders
The AME in orthopedic surgery concluded in reference to the spinal impairment ratings that the ROM method
was more accurate than the DRE method due to the fact that the applicant had multiple levels of spinal
impairment. As to the sleep disorder, the AME in internal medicine opined that the applicant had an industrially
related sleep disorder even though there was no sleep laboratory studies. In quoting this guidebook, the trial
judge, upheld by the Appeals Board by adopting and incorporating his Report and Recommendation on
Defendant’s Petition for Reconsideration, stated as follows:
Petitioner questions the determination of panel qualified medical examiner Timothy C. Reynolds, M.D. that
applicant suffered a sleep disorder as a result of her industrial injuries since “it is based on the subjective
reporting of the applicant.” There was no laboratory testing.
Page 317 of the Guides recites: “It is expected that the diagnosis of the excessive daytime sleepiness has
been supported by formal studies in a sleep laboratory.” The following paragraph reads: “The clinician can
evaluate sleepiness with the Epworth Sleepiness Scale…in different situations: sitting and reading,
watching television, sitting in a public place, riding as a passenger for an hour, taking an afternoon nap,
sitting and talking to someone, sitting after a non-alcohol (sic.) lunch and stopped in traffic in a car.”
The “different situations” contemplated for the Epworth Sleepiness Scale are not the ones that could be
evaluated in a laboratory.
Petitioner’s position is that a formal study in a sleep laboratory study (absent in Dr. Reynolds’ evaluation) is
a sine qua non for the diagnosis.
Diagnosis must be separated from ratability—or more accurately recognition of impairment—under the
Guides.
The Lawyer’s Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers’ Compensation (2019) Rassp, Hon. Robert
G., Lexis Nexis posits that absent language qualifying that “it is expected” that a laboratory study is needed
for the diagnosis, and points out that that such a study is necessary under the DSM-IV TR.
But the Guides are not mandated for the purpose of diagnosis, but rather for determining impairment.
Neither is the DSM IV TR mandated by the Labor Code or Regulations for a diagnosis.
Judge Rassp comments: “If you ask most clinical practitioners, they will almost uniformly agree that you do
not need a polysomnogram in every case to diagnose a sleep disorder.”
Once again, Almaraz/Guzman (supra.) permits some level of deviation from the Guides and if this applies
to the mandated function of determining impairment, it follows that deviation may also be appropriate for
the precatory function of diagnosis.
These injuries pre-dated the 01/01/2013 limitations, and a sleep disorder can be established as a stand-
alone WPI rating using Table 13-4.
Rassp comments: “For now we are taking a strict approach to the issue of when a sleep disorder can be
rated in a workers’ compensation case. Case law may clarify some of the controversies that arise in cases
that involve an allegation of a sleep disorder.”
Ratability of Sleep Disorder
Dr. Reynolds assessed the sleep disorder based on the symptom history and his Epworth and Fatigue
Symptom Inventory questionnaires. He placed the applicant in Class 1 at 6% WPI, squarely within the 1%
to 9% set forth in Table 13-4. This is well within the physician’s judgement in applying the Guides to his
findings.
Adding versus Combining Orthopedic and Sleep Disorder Permanent Disabilities
Dr. Reynolds concluded that the sleep disorder disability acted synergistically with the pain from her
orthopedic conditions, making her more disabled than the AME Guides CVC would calculate.
Petitioner asserts that this analysis is flawed since the synergism he finds involves one body system within
his expertise and one which is not. However, his analysis is based on the effects of sleep deprivation itself.
He states (Court’s Exhibit DD, report 08/06/2020, page 19):
Furthermore, sleep is a restorative. Sleep deprivation results in generalized achiness not unlike the
myalgias that can occur in viral infections, as many a “let’s stay up and watch the sunrise” reveler may be
able to recall. People who have orthopedic conditions must enjoy restful sleep in order to obviate the
worsening of their musculoskeletal pain.
Page 5 of 5
§ 9.21 Sleep Disorders
Thus, Dr. Reynolds is not making his determination based on a body system outside his [expertise] but
instead evaluating the synergistic effect on the sleep disorder in conjunction with the orthopedic conditions.
Miller v. State of California, Ventura Youth Correctional Facility, 2023 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 73, *5-8
(Cal. Workers’ Comp. App. Bd. April 10, 2023)
This is one of the few published WCAB cases that address whether a sleep disorder is ratable as a
compensable consequence of a physical injury. Counsel is reminded that the dates of injury in this case are
prior to January 1, 2013. For injuries occurring on or after January 1, 2013, the sleep disorder in this case
would not be ratable pursuant to Labor Code Section 4060.1 unless the following occurred:
1. The sleep disorder is due to a direct brain injury, infection, or disease process;
2. The underlying injury is due to a violent act; or
3. The sleep disorder is part of a catastrophic injury.
Counsel is reminded that a sleep disorder is a psychiatric condition as described above in the DSM-5 TR.
Therefore, a psychiatric permanent disability is ratable for a post-2012 date of injury if the injury is considered
catastrophic or a result of a violent act.
[4] Checklist for Sleep Disorder Claims
If there is a claim for sleep disorder in any case, the following checklist is recommended:
1. If a medical doctor suspects a sleep disorder, a referral to a qualified sleep laboratory is in order if the
sleep disorder is not caused by pain.
2. If the sleep disorder is caused by pain, then you treat the underlying condition that is causing the pain,
i.e., pain management program, more aggressive medical or surgical treatment. Forget about a sleep
study. Add up to 3% for pain related impairment using the 2005 PDRS, page 1-12.
3. If a sleep disorder exists, the type and category should be diagnosed by a medical doctor (preferably a
psychiatrist) or psychologist using the DSM-IV criteria.
4. An Epworth Sleepiness Scale should be performed at least a few times to obtain consistent results, if
possible.
5. An analysis by the medical doctor or psychologist should be made to determine the class of sleep and
arousal disorder impairment under Table 13-4.
6. The physician determines the WPI rating within a class, stating how and why the patient falls into a class
and rating within that class along with the cause or link of the sleep disorder to the industrial injury.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.22
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.22 Limitation of Compensability of Physical-Mental Disorder Based on
Good Faith Personnel Actions
[1] Overview
It is helpful to include within this chapter on psychiatric injuries a synopsis of case law that puts into practice the
principles of Labor Code § 3208.3. With statutory terminology in place to include “lawful, good-faith, non-
discriminatory personnel actions,” counsel need to be familiar with the judicial interpretations of the meaning
and scope of the definitions of this terminology. In addition, when does Labor Code § 3208.3 apply and when
does it not? In this section, you can refer to all of the pertinent cases in order to prepare a trial brief, prepare for
trial itself, or to write an appeal or response to one. If you prosecute or defend a case involving a claim of
psychiatric injury, this section will provide you with proper guidance.
Once you read the McCoy decision, discussed in [2], below, in the context of existing case law on psychiatric
and non-psychiatric job stress cases, you can better distinguish psyche cases that have no reason to be filed in
the first place and those that are legitimately caused by industrial exposure. Mr. McCoy’s case did not pass the
smell test by the trial judge or by the District Court of Appeal.
For any psychiatric injury that occurs on or after 1/1/2013, under Labor Code § 4660.1(c), counsel must be
vigilant in making sure the psychiatric disorder is not a compensable consequence of a physical injury,
otherwise the psychiatric disorder would have to be from a catastrophic injury in order for permanent disability
from the psychiatric condition to be added to the rating from the physical component of the claim. If the
psychiatric condition is a compensable consequence of a physical injury, the employer must still provide
treatment for the psychiatric condition on an industrial basis even though no increase in the permanent
disability rating can occur on account of the compensable consequential psychiatric condition. In addition, the
employer may be liable for temporary total disability indemnity while the injured worker is not MMI for all
medical conditions caused by the industrial injury, including a psyche sequelae.
Many attorneys are doing a “work-around” of the limitations of Labor Code § 4660.1 by filing a separate
psychiatric cumulative trauma injury claim instead of including a psychiatric component to a specific injury
claim. Unless the medical evidence substantiates causation of a psychiatric condition under the DSM-5 TR as a
result of cumulative trauma as opposed to a compensable consequence of a physical injury, this strategy may
not be upheld under the scrutiny of the WCAB.
That being said, the case law discussed below will assist you in evaluating cases whenever there is a “psyche”
claim.
[2] County of San Bernardino v. W.C.A.B. (McCoy)
The question of whether Labor Code § 3208.3 restrictions apply in cases where physiological symptoms are
caused by a psychiatric condition was decided by the Court of Appeal. In County of San Bernardino v. Workers’
Comp. Appeals Bd. (McCoy) [(2012) 203 Cal. App. 4th 1469, 138 Cal. Rptr. 3d 328, 77 Cal. Comp. Cases 219],
an employee had a pre-existing history of migraine headaches. He obtained a job with the County of San
Bernardino as an automated systems technician in July 2005 through January 19, 2006. His supervisor
repeatedly verbally reprimanded him during the six months he worked for the County and then he filed a
cumulative trauma claim to his psyche, which was denied AOE/COE. On the day of trial, his attorney amended
the claim to include injury in the form of migraine headaches. The WCJ issued a “take nothing” based on the
Page 2 of 6
§ 9.22 Limitation of Compensability of Physical-Mental Disorder Based on Good Faith Personnel Actions
defense under Labor Code § 3208.3(h) that the psychiatric injuries were substantially caused by lawful, non-
discriminatory, good faith personnel actions and therefore were not compensable.
The applicant then filed a Petition for Reconsideration that was granted, reversing the WCJ and finding that
Labor Code § 3208.3(h) did not bar compensation for migraines since they are not a psychiatric condition listed
in the DSM-IV as required by section 3208.3(a) and finding that the migraines were aggravated by job stress.
The County then filed its own Petition for Reconsideration, contending that a section 3208.3(h) good faith
personnel action defense should apply because the sole contributing factor that aggravated the applicant’s
migraines was the stress he suffered from the disciplinary actions undertaken in good faith. The WCAB panel
denied reconsideration on the basis that migraine headaches are not listed in the DSM-III or DSM-IV as
required for a psychiatric condition to be compensable under Labor Code § 3208.3(a).
The District Court of Appeal (DCA) granted a writ and reversed the WCAB and held that “the good faith
personnel action defense precludes recovery for psychiatric injuries with resulting physiological manifestations
solely caused by stress from such actions.” The DCA then pronounced: “We are aware of the well-established
rule that physical injuries or conditions aggravated by work-related stress are compensable” citing Lamb v.
WCAB [(1974) 11 Cal.3d 274, 113 Cal. Rptr. 162, 39 Cal. Comp. Cases 310 (heart attack caused by job stress
compensable)]. The DCA further pronounced: “Our holding does not undermine this rule because it is limited to
cases, as here, where there is no evidence that the employee suffered on the job stress apart from that caused
by the good faith personnel actions.”
Does this decision mean that if Mr. McCoy had suffered a heart attack after his supervisor yelled at him for the
umpteenth time about his inferior job performance that the heart attack would be a result of a good faith
personnel action and therefore not compensable as opposed to the applicant in Lamb whose heart attack was
caused by job stress that was not related to personnel actions [see [3], below]? What if Mr. McCoy had suffered
an aggravation of a stomach ulcer from good faith “friction with his supervisor” over his job performance or lack
thereof?
TREND ALERT:
There is ongoing confusion under McCoy of whether causation thresholds and affirmative defenses
provided for in Labor Code § 3208.3 (lawful, good faith, non-discriminatory personnel action) apply to a
physical injury that is the manifestation of work related stress. In Stolp v. California Department of
Developmental Services [2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 508 (Appeals Board noteworthy panel
decision)], the WCAB affirmed the WCJ's finding that the applicant peace officer's claim for cumulative
psychiatric and cardiovascular injury was barred by the lawful, good-faith, nondiscriminatory personnel
action defense under Labor Code § 3208.3(h) and pursuant to the analysis in Rolda v. Pitney Bowes,
Inc. [(2001) 66 Cal. Comp. Cases 241 (Appeals Board en banc opinion)].
The WCAB found that the applicant’s psychiatric injury was caused by the investigation and
disciplinary action undertaken by the employer in response to the applicant’s serious mishandling of an
incident involving allegations of a staff member “tasing patients” at the Sonoma Developmental Center.
The WCAB concluded that the personnel actions taken by the employer were conducted in good-faith
given the seriousness of the applicant’s conduct. Furthermore, the WCAB found that the agreed
medical examiner’s reports established that the applicant’s cardiovascular injury was directly and solely
caused by the applicant’s psychiatric condition, which the WCAB found was non-compensable under
Labor Code § 3208.3(h). Applying the holding in County of San Bernardino v. W.C.A.B. (McCoy)
[(2012) 203 Cal. App. 4th 1469, 138 Cal. Rptr. 3d 328, 77 Cal. Comp. Cases 219], the WCAB
concluded that the applicant’s cardiovascular injury, having been solely caused by the applicant’s non-
compensable psychiatric injury, was also barred.
In Wang v. Southern California Edison [2015 Cal. Wrk. Comp. P.D. LEXIS 511 (Appeals Board
noteworthy panel decision)], the WCAB rescinded the WCJ's finding that the applicant senior
engineer's claim for industrial heart injury caused by stress from being placed in the employer's
performance improvement program was barred by the lawful, good-faith, nondiscriminatory personnel
action defense under Labor Code § 3208.3(h). The WCAB concluded that the plain reading of Labor
Page 3 of 6
§ 9.22 Limitation of Compensability of Physical-Mental Disorder Based on Good Faith Personnel Actions
Code § 3208.3(h) limits its application to psychiatric injuries. Although cumulative stress can result in
an injury, stress alone does not constitute a psychiatric injury. Heart conditions by legal definition are
physical, not psychiatric, injuries, and in order for a heart condition to fall within the “mental-physical”
definition of a psychiatric injury, the evidence must establish that the industrial causation of the heart
condition flows entirely from the psychiatric injury. The WCAB further found that the holding in County
of San Bernardino v. W.C.A.B. (McCoy) [(2012) 203 Cal. App. 4th 1469, 77 Cal. Comp. Cases 219],
upon which the defendant relied in support of its position that the applicant's heart injury was barred,
involved a limited exception for a physical condition that was solely the consequence of a non-
compensable psychiatric injury, whereas, here, no psychiatric injury was pled. When the defendant
contends that the applicant's claimed physical condition is the sole result of a non-compensable
psychiatric injury, the defendant must prove that the applicant suffered a psychiatric injury and the
psychiatric injury was not compensable pursuant to Labor Code § 3208.3 and the psychiatric condition
was the sole industrial cause of the physical condition in question. According to the WCAB, the record
in this case requires further development on all issues relating to the parties' respective burdens of
proof under McCoy, as clarified by the WCAB.
Commissioner Sweeney, concurring separately, found that the holding in McCoy does not apply here
because the applicant suffered only a physical injury caused by work stress and no psychiatric injury
whatsoever, that the physical injuries and psychiatric injuries require different burdens of proof, and
that the good-faith, nondiscriminatory personnel action defense does not apply to physical injuries such
as the heart injury incurred by the applicant.
These cases reflect the ongoing uncertainty in the workers’ compensation community over whether the
causation thresholds and affirmative defenses provided for in Labor Code § 3208.3 apply to a physical
injury that is the manifestation of work related stress. These types of injuries might include headaches,
hypertension, heart or a variety of internal problems. In Wang, the employee pled an injury to his heart;
in Stolp, the employee claimed injury to his cardiovascular system and psyche.
These cases struggle to apply the Fourth Appellate District Court of Appeal’s decision in McCoy. The
reason they struggle is that McCoy is a very poorly reasoned decision. McCoy found that where the
physical manifestation of stress was “directly and solely” the result of a psychological injury suffered as
a result of good faith personnel actions, the claim is barred pursuant to Labor Code § 3208.3(h). The
problem is that a physical injury, even a physical injury that is the manifestation of work stress, is not
the “result of” a psychological injury. The court fails to acknowledge the very significant distinction
between a physical injury caused by work related stress and a psychiatric injury caused by work
related stress.
By failing to make this distinction, McCoy can be interpreted broadly, as in Stolp, or more limitedly, as
in Wang. The Stolp and Wang decisions suggest that the outcome of these cases may hinge on
whether the employee has alleged an injury to the psyche as well as the physical condition or just the
physical condition independent of any claim of psychiatric injury. The majority in Wang specifically
noted the significance of neither the defense nor applicant alleging injury to the employee’s psyche in
that case. The concurring opinion in Wang actually got it right when she pointed out that the Labor
Code § 3208.3 causation thresholds plain and simply do not apply to physical injuries. She correctly
argued that the causation thresholds are different for the two types of injuries and they should stay that
way.
Whether this issue makes its way up to another appellate district court of appeal remains to be seen.
As long as McCoy is the controlling authority on the issue, the only guarantee is that the system is
going to have ongoing confusion and litigation over whether or not the provisions of Labor Code
§ 3208.3 apply to physical conditions that are the result of work related stress. ■
The DCA has apparently rejected the notion that you have to begin with a DSM diagnosis of a psychiatric
condition, which was thought to be part of Labor Code § 3208.3(a). This decision seems to instead first focus on
the cause of the physical manifestation. If the cause of the physical manifestation of job stress is good faith
personnel actions, then the physical manifestations are not compensable? How can this DCA decision be
Page 4 of 6
§ 9.22 Limitation of Compensability of Physical-Mental Disorder Based on Good Faith Personnel Actions
reconciled with Lamb and other case law [see [3]–[4], below]? Could the legal analysis simply boil down to a
“smell test?”
[3] Lamb v. W.C.A.B.
It is well settled law that emotional stress can cause a compensable physical injury, including death. In Lamb v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. [(1974) 11 Cal. 3d 274, 113 Cal. Rptr. 162, 39 Cal. Comp. Cases 310, 520 P.2d
978], Mr. Lamb worked as a machinist for 24 years with the same company and he perceived his job as
extremely stressful. Mr. Lamb was found dead of a heart attack at the job site after working long hours and
complaining to his wife over time how hard he was working and how little help he was receiving. There was
undisputed evidence that Mr. Lamb suffered from emotional stress from his job. Therefore, there was no
discussion of the existence of any stress that was caused by any personnel actions.
The sole issue presented in Lamb was whether Mr. Lamb’s employment was a contributing cause of his death
since all of the evaluating physicians had concluded that stress, whether emotional or physical, could aggravate
heart disease. The Supreme Court further emphasized that it is irrelevant whether job stress is inherent to the
type of work a claimant has: “Industry takes the employee as it finds him. A person suffering from a pre-existing
disease who is disabled by an injury proximately arising out of the employment is entitled to compensation even
though a normal man would not have been adversely affected by the event. [Citations omitted]. By the same
token, it is not the Board’s assessment of the amount of stress inherent in a workman’s employment which
governs in matters of stress-caused injury, but rather the Board’s determination of the amount of stress which
the particular employment has in fact exerted upon the particular workman.”
However, remember the Supreme Court decision in Lamb was in 1974, long before the limitations in psychiatric
injuries were imposed by the legislature in Labor Code § 3208.3 in 1989 to eliminate bogus psyche cases. What
is important to note today is that Mr. Lamb and his widow never alleged a psychiatric injury in the first place.
To complicate matters further, we are now entering into a new era for 2013 injuries in which Labor Code
§ 4660.1(c) prohibits increasing permanent disability for psychiatric disorders that are caused by a physical
injury unless the injury was catastrophic. In any event, the employer will still have to provide treatment and
potential temporary total disability indemnity for the psychiatric injury even though no additional permanent
disability can be attributed to it.
[4] Lockheed Martin v. W.C.A.B. (McCullough)
The DCA in Lockheed Martin v. Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd. (McCullough) [(2002) 96 Cal. App. 4th 1237, 117
Cal. Rptr. 2d 865, 67 Cal. Comp. Cases 245] established the rule that Labor Code § 3208.3 applies in all
psyche injuries, regardless of how a psychiatric condition manifests itself as part of an industrial injury. In this
case, the DCA held that the provision in section 3208.3 that actual events of employment be the predominant
cause of all causes of a psychiatric injury applies even when the psychiatric condition is an alleged
compensable consequence of a physical injury.
Footnote 6 in McCullough is relevant here: “There are three general types of psychological injury related to
employment: (1) physical injury producing psychic trauma or symptoms not physiologically verifiable [physical-
mental]; (2) psychic trauma producing physical injury [mental-physical]; and psychic trauma producing
psychological injury [mental-mental]. [Citation omitted]”
How does the McCoy case fit here [see [2], above]? Is McCoy involving a “physical-mental” injury like
McCullough where she had physical injuries (orthopedic neck and upper extremities) that caused depression?
Is depression “physiologically non-verifiable?” Is McCoy involving a “mental-physical” injury where you have a
psychic trauma that produces physical injury? Or is the McCoy case one of “mental-mental” where psychic
trauma is producing psychological injury (such as a bank robbery causes post-traumatic stress disorder)?
Since McCoy was claiming psychiatric job stress aggravated his migraines, the case appears to be one of a
“mental-physical” if migraines are considered a “physical” manifestation of a psychic trauma and “is not
physiologically verifiable,” as defined by the DCA in McCullough. It appears that is what the DCA is saying in
McCoy—if the “mental” occurs first, then you must address the “physical” in the same context as the mental—is
Page 5 of 6
§ 9.22 Limitation of Compensability of Physical-Mental Disorder Based on Good Faith Personnel Actions
the mental a result of good-faith personnel actions? Is the “physical” manifestation “physiologically verifiable?” If
not, then a good faith personnel action defense may be a viable defense to compensability of the claim.
But it appears the DCA in McCoy is confusing the criteria in Footnote 6 of McCullough for “physical-mental,”
which refers to symptoms “not physiologically verifiable” with the criteria for “mental-physical,” which does not
require some kind of physiological verification. McCoy did not suffer any kind of physical injury in the first
place—this was a pure psyche injury that manifested itself physically in the form of an aggravation of migraine
headaches. Maybe the court in McCoy is recognizing a fourth kind of psychological injury—“mental-physical
with no physiological verification.”
Rest assured, conditions such as “migraine headaches” and “stomach aches” are generally not directly ratable
in the AMA Guides as a stand-alone physiological WPI permanent impairment, even though medically, migraine
headaches can be quite debilitating. Medically, there is no known physiological verification of headaches or
stomach aches. Headaches and stomach aches are both conditions that are real but are based on subjective
complaints only without any objective medical signs or verification.
It is apparent that the DCA opinion in McCoy specifically addresses a new type of “mental-physical” variety of
psyche cases where the physiological symptoms are not verifiable. If the DCA in McCoy had cited footnote 6 in
McCullough, the decision would have been much clearer to all of us. The McCoy decision is actually a very
narrow one when you read it in context to existing case law involving alleged psychiatric injuries. The good faith
personnel actions that substantially caused psychological stress resulting in non-verifiable physiological
manifestations of migraine headaches means that Mr. McCoy’s claim should be non-compensable under Labor
Code § 3208.3(h) and is consistent with footnote 6 in McCullough.
If Mr. McCoy had suffered a heart attack or aggravation of a stomach ulcer as a result of his supervisor yelling
at him, assuming a supervisor yelling at a subordinate is in good faith, these physical manifestations of psychic
trauma are “physiologically verifiable” and, therefore, would not fall under the purview of footnote 6 in
McCullough and would not be subject to a good faith personnel action defense. In fact, the “injury” here would
be the heart or gastro-intestinal system with verifiable physiologic components and the injury would not be a
“psyche” injury at all. The Supreme Court’s analysis in Lamb of job stress being a contributing factor affecting
the cardio-vascular system is still good law today.
Defendants would be hard pressed to assert a good faith personnel action defense in a case like Lamb even if
the job stress was solely a result of good faith personnel actions if the employee suffers a heart attack as a
result of the stress. First, excluding compensability for a heart attack that is caused by good faith personnel
actions does not promote the underlying legislative intent of Labor Code § 3208.3 to limit bogus psyche claims
as reiterated in the McCoy decision.
Secondly, such a case is distinguishable from the types of limitations in psyche cases that are imposed in
McCullough and as stated by the DCA at the end of the McCoy decision. Footnote 6 in McCullough would not
exclude compensability where physical manifestations of stress are physiologically verifiable even though the
job stress is a result of good faith personnel actions. The job stress in these cases does not cause or contribute
to a psychiatric condition—it causes or contributes directly to a physical injury—the heart and cardiovascular
system. The stress is a direct insult on the physiologically verifiable physical part of body. For an employee who
is called into a human resources office to meet with his or her supervisor for a disciplinary action and who
suffers a heart attack thereafter, a McCoy “defense” would not be viable. This is because there is no underlying
psychiatric trauma with an unverifiable physiological reaction under the criteria set forth in McCullough. It would
not even be a psyche case subject to analysis under Labor Code § 3208.3.
[5] Rolda v. Pitney Bowes, Inc.
When you are confronted with a “physical-mental,” “mental-physical,” or “mental-mental” case, you must
remember the sequential step analysis that is mandated by the WCAB en banc decision in Rolda v. Pitney
Bowes, Inc. [(2001) 66 Cal. Comp. Cases 241 (Appeals Board en banc decision)]. This case was a mental-
mental claim involving an outside salesman who could not make it as a salesman, became stressed out and
filed a claim for “psychic trauma resulting in psychological injury” in the framework of footnote 6 in McCullough
[see [4], above].
Counsel must use the Rolda decision as a checklist in prosecuting and defending any psychiatric claim:
Page 6 of 6
§ 9.22 Limitation of Compensability of Physical-Mental Disorder Based on Good Faith Personnel Actions
1. The WCJ must determine whether the alleged psychiatric injury involves actual events of employment.
2. Medical evidence has to establish the psychiatric condition is predominantly caused by actual events of
employment or substantially caused where the injury resulted from being the victim of a violent act.
3. The WCJ then decides whether any of the actual events of employment were personnel actions and, if
so, whether any of them were lawful, nondiscriminatory, good-faith personnel actions.
4. If any lawful, non-discriminatory, good faith personnel actions contributed to the injury, medical evidence
is required to determine whether such personnel actions were a substantial cause, 35–40%, of the
injury. The evaluating physician must offer their opinion as to the percentage of causation for any such
alleged or apparent actions.
5. If the WCJ then decides the psychiatric condition is substantially caused by lawful, good faith non-
discriminatory personnel actions, the psychiatric claim is not compensable under Labor Code § 3208.3.
[6] Larch v. Contra Costa County
In Larch v. Contra Costa County [(1998) 63 Cal. Comp. Cases 831 (Appeals Board en banc decision), writ
denied 64 Cal. Comp. Cases 1098], the WCAB en banc issued a decision that defines lawful, non-
discriminatory, good faith personnel actions. The Larch case was cited and relied on in the WCAB en banc
decision of Rolda [see [5], above]. The WCAB provides us with the following definitions to be used in a good
faith personnel action defense:
1. “Personnel action” is defined as “An employer’s disciplinary action short of termination may be
considered personnel actions even if they are harsh and if the actions were not so clearly out of
proportion to the employee’s deficiencies so that no reasonable manager could have imposed such
discipline … We conclude that a personnel action is conduct either by or attributable to management
including such things as done by one who has the authority to review, criticize, demote, or discipline an
employee. It is not necessary for the personnel action to have a direct or immediate effect on the
employment status. Personnel actions may include but are not necessarily limited to transfers,
demotions, layoffs, performance evaluations, and disciplinary actions such as warnings, suspensions,
and terminations of employment” [see Larch v. Contra Costa County (1998) 63 Cal. Comp. Cases 831,
835 (Appeals Board en banc decision)].
2. “Good Faith” is defined to mean: “To be in good faith, the personnel action must be done in a manner
that is lacking outrageous conduct, is honest and with a sincere purpose, is without an intent to
mislead, deceive, or defraud, and is without collusion or unlawful design.” In other words, the personnel
action must be “objectively reasonable” [see Larch v. Contra Costa County (1998) 63 Cal. Comp.
Cases 831, 837 (Appeals Board en banc decision)].
3. “Lawful” is defined to mean “warranted or authorized by the law having the qualifications prescribed by
law not contrary to nor forbidden by the law not illegal … The word ‘lawful’ more clearly implies an
ethical content and usually imports a moral substance or ethical permissibility” [see Larch v. Contra
Costa County (1998) 63 Cal. Comp. Cases 831, 838 (Appeals Board en banc decision)].
4. “Non-discriminatory” means whether the employer treated applicant differently than others similarly
situated without justification [see Larch v. Contra Costa County (1998) 63 Cal. Comp. Cases 831, 838
(Appeals Board en banc decision)].
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp § 9.23
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  CHAPTER 9
Psychiatric Injuries
§ 9.23 Definition of Malingering
The term “malingering” has been and will continue to be a buzz word among claims examiners and defense counsel
defending psychiatric claims. First and foremost, do you really know that constitutes malingering? Is malingering the
same thing as seeking secondary gain? Is malingering a DSM diagnosis? What medical specialty is qualified to
conclude that an injured worker is malingering? Is it something like obscenity—you know it when you see it?
First of all, malingering has been overused over the years in the defense bar in both workers’ compensation claims
and personal injury litigation. It is in fact a psychiatric diagnosis and cannot be taken seriously when a doctor who is
not a psychiatrist or psychologist accuses an injured worker of malingering. So the only qualified physician who can
diagnose a person as a malingerer is a mental health specialist, or, perhaps, a workers’ compensation judge.
Secondly, like any other mental disorder, the diagnostic criteria for malingering has to be established by a proper
medical evaluation. The DSM-5 TR has a working definition of malingering on page 835:
The essential feature of malingering is the intentional production of false or grossly exaggerated physical or
psychological symptoms, motivated by external incentives such avoiding military duty, avoiding work, obtaining
financial compensation, evading criminal prosecution, or obtaining drugs. Under some circumstances,
malingering may represent adaptive behavior—for example, feigning illness while a captive of the enemy
during wartime. Malingering should be strongly considered if any combination of the following is noted:
1. Medico-legal context of presentation (e.g. the individual is referred by an attorney to the clinician for
examination, or the individual self-refers while litigation or criminal charges are pending).
2. Marked discrepancy between the individual’s claimed stress or disability and the objective findings and
observations.
3. Lack of cooperation during the diagnostic evaluation and in complying with the prescribed treatment regimen.
4. The presence of antisocial personality disorder.
Malingering differs from factitious disorder (see DSM-5 TR, page 367) in that the motivation for the symptom
production in malingering is an external incentive, whereas in factitious disorder external incentives are absent.
Malingering is differentiated from functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder) and other
somatic symptom-related mental disorders by the intentional production of symptoms and by the obvious
external incentives associated with it. Definite evidence of feigning (such as clear evidence that loss of function
is present during the examination but not at home) would suggest a diagnosis of factitious disorder if the
individual’s apparent aim is to assume the sick role, or malingering if it is to obtain an incentive, such as
money.
The authors of the DSM-5 TR make it clear that malingering is not a mental disorder. See DSM-5 TR page 821.
The purpose of naming malingering in the last chapter of the DSM-5 TR is: “The conditions and problems listed in
this chapter are not mental disorders. Their inclusion in the DSM-5 TR is meant to draw attention to the scope of
additional issues that may be encountered in routine clinical practice and to provide a systematic listing that may be
useful to clinicians in documenting these issues.” So this discussion in the DSM-5 TR leaves a very significant
medical-legal issue—who determines that a given injured worker is malingering? Is this a question of fact to be
found by a judge or is it still a situation that needs to be “diagnosed” by a psychiatrist or psychologist? The answer
appears to be that a licensed psychiatrist or psychologist is required to establish that someone is malingering based
Page 2 of 3
§ 9.23 Definition of Malingering
on the above criteria as there is a separate corresponding ICD-10 code for it: Z76.5 and under the DSM-5 TR
heading “Additional Conditions or Problems That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention.” See DSM-5 TR page 834.
In contrast, a Factitious Disorder is a mental disorder and is described on pages 367-369 of the DSM-5 TR. The
disorder has the following diagnostic criteria:
A. Falsification of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or induction of injury or disease, associated with
identified deception.
B. The individual presents himself or herself to others as ill, impaired, or injured.
C. The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards.
D. The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as delusional disorder or another
psychotic disorder.
The distinction of a factitious disorder and malingering is clear. A malingerer is clearly seeking financial benefit by
faking illness or injury while someone who has the mental disorder of factitious disorder has no obvious external
rewards by faking it. A person who has factitious disorder “demonstrates that the individual is taking surreptitious
actions to misrepresent, simulate, or cause signs or symptoms of illness or injury even in the absence of obvious
external rewards.” See DSM-5 TR page 368. People with this disorder seek medical attention repeatedly. A good
example of a person who has this disorder would add blood to a urine sample to falsely indicate an abnormality.
The focus is on the symptoms presented and not on the motivations of the “falsifier.” This author could not find
“Munchausen Syndrome” in the DSM-5 TR. This is because the term was replaced by the current DSM-5 TR
mental disorder, Factitious Disorder. There is no longer a diagnosis of Munchausen By Proxy—there is now
Factitious Disorder Imposed On Another; see DSM-5 TR page 367.
So how is this information useful to legal counsel in workers’ compensation cases? One takeaway is that there has
to be a psychiatrist or psychologist who diagnoses malingering as opposed to any other actual mental disorder. If
an orthopedic surgeon believes an injured worker is exaggerating or faking their physical complaints based on
examination, or surveillance videos, or both, the physician cannot diagnose malingering. All an orthopedic surgeon
can do is evaluate the objective medical findings and WPI ratings in light of the observed physical activities of the
injured worker depicted in the video. Remember, a person can have a ratable impairment under the AMA Guides
but not be disabled in the sense of some activities of daily living. Sometimes, for example, an orthopedic surgeon
could change a DRE Category III lumbar spine impairment to a DRE Category II rating in light of significant video
evidence that the injured worker is engaging in activities that are inconsistent with a person with a lumbar spinal
radiculopathy. The injured worker’s attorney could address that issue by contending that the injured worker was
under the influence of medication or a properly placed epidural steroid injection either of which or both could
alleviate radicular symptoms. This issue boils down to how credible the surveillance videos are and a
comprehensive review of them by a physician. In addition, the injured worker may have a valid explanation of their
activities depicted in the video.
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
Page 3 of 3
§ 9.23 Definition of Malingering
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp Appendix A.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Appendix A
2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule
Appendix A 2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule
Synopsis
Appendix A2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule
[A]  2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp [A]
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Appendix A
2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule
[A] 2005 Permanent Disability Rating Schedule
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp Appendix B.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Appendix B
[Reserved]
Appendix B [Reserved]
Synopsis
Appendix B[Reserved]
[B]  [Reserved]
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp [B]
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Appendix B
[Reserved]
[B] [Reserved]

NOTE: As of the publication deadline for this Edition of the guidebook, the Administrative Director has
not adopted any new PDRS.
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp Appendix C.syn
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Appendix C
Permanent Disability Rates
Appendix C Permanent Disability Rates
Synopsis
Appendix CPermanent Disability Rates
[C]  Permanent Disability Rates
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
1 Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp [C]
The Lawyer's Guide to the AMA Guides and California Workers' Compensation  >  Appendix C
Permanent Disability Rates
[C] Permanent Disability Rates
Lawyer's Guide to AMA Guides and CA Workers' Comp
Copyright 2024,  Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group.
End of Document
